there is a lack of high quality evidence on the effectiveness of dietary interventions. this review provides no evidence that fibre supplements, lactose free diets or lactobacillus supplementation are effective in the management of children with rap.
there is evidence from one trial that compression hosiery reduces rates of reulceration of venous ulcers compared with no compression. results from one trial suggest that recurrence is lower in high-compression hosiery than in medium-compression hosiery at three years whilst another trial found no difference at 5 years. rates of patient intolerance of compression hosiery were high. there is insufficient evidence to aid selection of different types, brands, or lengths of compression hosiery.
the only trial included in the review provides evidence that endonasal dcr has statistically higher risk of failure compared to external dcr. however, this conclusion is limited by paucity of rcts, small number of participants and lack of clarity of the methodological process. well conducted rcts with sufficient power are required to answer the research question.
infants enrolled in the trials were relatively mature and healthy preterm infants. assessment schedule and methodology, dose and source of supplementation and fatty acid composition of the control formula varied between trials. on pooling of results, no clear long-term benefits or harms were demonstrated for preterm infants receiving lcpufa-supplemented formula.
oral prostaglandin consistently resulted in more frequent gastrointestinal side-effects, in particular vomiting, compared with the other treatments included in this review. there were no clear advantages to oral prostaglandin over other methods of induction of labour. [note: the six citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
this review demonstrated that physical training can improve cardiopulmonary fitness and was well tolerated among people with asthma in the included studies. as such, people with stable asthma should be encouraged to partake in regular exercise training, without fear of symptom exacerbation.
small sample sizes, methodologic limitations, inconsistencies in controlling variables that may affect outcomes, and conflicting results of the studies to date make it difficult to make universal recommendations regarding the best tube feeding method for premature infants less than 1500 grams. the clinical benefits and risks of continuous versus intermittent nasogastric tube milk feeding cannot be reliably discerned from the limited information available from randomised trials to date.
the present systematic review is the most comprehensive summary of the evidence assessing the benefits and harms of intermittent iron supplementation regimens in pregnant women on haematological and pregnancy outcomes. the findings suggest that intermittent iron+folic acid regimens produce similar maternal and infant outcomes at birth as daily supplementation but are associated with fewer side effects. women receiving daily supplements had increased risk of developing high levels of hb in mid and late pregnancy but were less likely to present mild anaemia near term. although the evidence is limited and the quality of the trials was low or very low, intermittent may be a feasible alternative to daily iron supplementation among those pregnant women who are not anaemic and have adequate antenatal care.
treatment with a bisphosphonate, vitamin d sterol or calcitonin after kidney transplantation may protect against immunosuppression-induced reductions in bone mineral density and prevent fracture. adequately powered trials are required to determine whether bisphosphonates are better than vitamin d sterols for fracture prevention in this population. the optimal route, timing, and duration of administration of these interventions remains unknown.
there is insufficient robust evidence to determine the relative effects of different methods of external fixation. adequately powered studies could provide better evidence.
acetaminophen may help relieve nasal obstruction and rhinorrhoea but does not appear to improve some other cold symptoms (including sore throat, malaise, sneezing and cough). however, two of the four included studies in this review were small and allocation concealment was unclear in all four studies. the data in this review do not provide sufficient evidence to inform practice regarding the use of acetaminophen for the common cold in adults. further large-scale, well-designed trials are needed to determine whether this intervention is beneficial in the treatment of adults with the common cold.
routine phenobarbitone in cerebral malaria is associated with fewer convulsions but possibly more deaths. further trials with adequate design, more participants, and different doses of anticonvulsant drugs are needed.
the laparoscopic ipaa is a feasible and safe procedure. short-term advantages of the laparoscopic approach seem to be limited and their clinical significance is arguable. large high-quality trials focusing on differences regarding specific postoperative complications, cosmesis, quality of life and costs are needed.
too few patients have been studied in randomised trials to allow conclusions to be drawn about the effect of prostacyclin treatment on survival of people with acute stroke.
anticoagulants offered no net advantages over antiplatelet agents in acute ischaemic stroke. the combination of low-dose ufh and aspirin appeared in a subgroup analysis to be associated with net benefits compared with aspirin alone, and this merits further research.
breast stimulation appears beneficial in relation to the number of women not in labour after 72 hours, and reduced postpartum haemorrhage rates. until safety issues have been fully evaluated it should not be used in high-risk women. further research is required to evaluate its safety, and should seek data on postpartum haemorrhage rates, number of women not in labour at 72 hours and maternal satisfaction.
the relative efficacy and safety of adding inhaled corticosteroid to tiotropium and a long-acting beta2-agonist for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients remains uncertain and additional trials are required to answer this question.
there is no strong evidence to support the everyday use of any of the agents included in this review. all results must be considered inconclusive and these compounds probably should only be used within the context of a well-designed evaluative study.
the evidence for the benefits and harms of cholecystectomy in gallbladder dyskinesia from randomised clinical trials is based on a single small trial at risk of bias. further randomised clinical trials with improved bias control are necessary to confirm or reject the promising results.
current evidence is restricted to a single randomized clinical trial. it suggests that, in the short term, home therapy does not harm individuals, entails fewer investigations, reduces social disruptions and can be cost-effective. there were both advantages and disadvantages in terms of quality of life. the decision to attempt home treatment should be based on the individual situation and appropriate local resources. more research is urgently required.
the updated review contains new information supporting the previous conclusions that methadone has similar analgesic efficacy to morphine. the additional study examined neuropathic and non-neuropathic pain, finding no superiority for methadone in the former group. the new study also addresses a clinically relevant concern about short term/single dose studies. use beyond a few days may result in methadone accumulation leading to delayed onset of adverse effects. in an assessment over 28 days there was a higher rate of withdrawal due to side effects in the methadone group. this observation reinforces the advice that experienced clinicians should take responsibility for initiation and careful dose adjustment and monitoring of methadone.
corticosteroids significantly help relieve headache in patients with eosinophilic meningitis. however, there is only one rct supporting this benefit and this trial did not clearly mention allocation concealment and stratification. future well-designed rcts may be necessary.
since the usage of the ligasure technique results in significantly less immediate postoperative pain after hemoroidectomy without any adverse effect on postoperative complications, convalescence and incontinence-rate, this technique is superior in terms of patient tolerance. although there was a tendency for equal efficacy, more evaluation of the long-term risk of recurrent hemorrhoidal disease is required.
the available evidence is limited, but suggests that adjunctive g-csf treatment in people with a diabetic foot infection, including infected ulcers, does not appear to increase the likelihood of resolution of infection or healing of the foot ulcer. however, it does appear to reduce the need for surgical interventions, especially amputations, and the duration of hospitalisation. clinicians might consider adding g-csf to the usual treatment of diabetic foot infections, especially in patients with a limb-threatening infection, but it is not clear which patients might benefit.
a home-based nursing intervention has the potential to improve art adherence, but more evidence is needed. medication diaries do not appear to have an effect on adherence or disease outcomes. two interventions, an lpv/r-containing regimen and peer support therapy for adolescents, did not demonstrate improvements in adherence, yet demonstrated greater viral load suppression compared to control groups, suggesting a different mechanism for improved health outcomes. well-designed evaluations of interventions to improve paediatric adherence to art are needed.
the limited evidence available is low quality and suggests that face to face interventions to inform or educate parents about childhood vaccination have little to no impact on immunisation status, or knowledge or understanding of vaccination. there is insufficient evidence to comment on the cost of implementing the intervention, parent intention to vaccinate, parent experience of the intervention, or adverse effects. given the apparently limited effect of such interventions, it may be feasible and appropriate to incorporate communication about vaccination into a healthcare encounter, rather than conduct it as a separate activity.
the findings in this review confirm much that clinicians and recipients of care already know, but they provide quantification to support clinical impression. fluphenazine's global position as an effective treatment for psychoses is not threatened by the outcome of this review. however, fluphenazine is an imperfect treatment and if accessible, other inexpensive drugs less associated with adverse effects may be an equally effective choice for people with schizophrenia. the addition of seven studies to awaiting classification may alter the conclusions of this review once assessed.
there was evidence that individual tf-cbt was effective for individuals with acute traumatic stress symptoms compared to both waiting list and supportive counselling interventions. the quality of trials included was variable and sample sizes were often small. there was considerable clinical heterogeneity in the included studies and unexplained statistical heterogeneity observed in some comparisons. this suggests the need for caution in interpreting the results of this review. additional high quality trials with longer follow up periods are required to further test tf-cbt and other forms of psychological intervention.
the current evidence for the use of fluid and pharmacological agents for the prevention of adhesions is limited. there is no evidence on any benefit for improving pregnancy outcomes when pharmacological and fluid agents are used as an adjunct during pelvic surgery. there is insufficient evidence for the use of the following agents: steroids, icodextrin 4%, spraygel and dextran in improving adhesions following surgery. there is some evidence that hyaluronic acid agents may decrease the proportion of adhesions and prevent the deterioration of pre existing adhesions. however, due to the limited number of studies available, this evidence should be interpreted with caution and further studies are needed.
implanon, norplant and jadelle are highly effective contraceptive methods. no significant differences were found in contraceptive effectiveness or continuation. the most common side-effect with all implants was unpredictable vaginal bleeding. time taken for removal of implanon and jadelle was less than that for norplant.although this systematic review was unable to provide a definitive answer on relative effectiveness, tolerability and acceptability of contraceptive implants in comparison to other contraceptive methods, it has raised issues around the conduct of contraceptive research.
one small trial of allopurinol for treating chronic prostatitis showed improvements in patient-reported symptom improvement, investigator-graded prostate pain, and biochemical parameters. however, the data provided, the measures used, and the statistics presented do not make these findings convincing that changes in urine and prostatic secretion composition regarding purine and pyrimidine bases resulted in the relief of symptoms. further studies of allopurinol treatment using standardized and validated outcomes measures and analyses are necessary to determine whether allopurinol is effective.
at present, there is no evidence to recommend or refute cryotherapy for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. randomised clinical trials with low-risk of bias may help in defining the role of cryotherapy in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.
studies included in this review showed no evidence of effectiveness of interventions on episodes of relationship violence or on attitudes, behaviours and skills related to relationship violence. we found a small increase in knowledge but there was evidence of substantial heterogeneity among studies. further studies with longer-term follow-up are required, and study authors should use standardised and validated measurement instruments to maximise comparability of results.
available data are insufficient to conclude that balloon angioplasty is superior to medical therapy in lowering blood pressure of people with renal artery stenosis and pharmacologically controlled blood pressure. where hypertension is refractory to medical therapy, there is weak evidence that balloon angioplasty lowers blood pressure more effectively than medical therapy. balloon angioplasty appears to be safe and shows fewer cardiovascular and renovascular complications. randomised controlled trials are needed to compare the effect of balloon angioplasty and medical therapy on the preservation of renal function in the long term.
continuous antibiotic prophylaxis for 6-12 months reduced the rate of uti during prophylaxis when compared to placebo. after prophylaxis two studies showed no difference between groups. there were more adverse events in the antibiotic group. one rct compared postcoital versus continuous daily ciprofloxacin and found no significant difference in rates of utis, suggesting that postcoital treatment could be offered to woman who have uti associated with sexual intercourse.
there is currently a lack of evidence for the use of antihypertensive drugs for either the primary or secondary prevention of pd. more observational studies are required to identify potential drugs to go forward for safety and tolerability studies in people with early pd. the results of the ongoing trial will help inform further research.
major morbidity seems to be a rare outcome for both, laparoscopy and minilaparotomy. personal preference of the woman and/or of the surgeon can guide the choice of technique. practical aspects must be taken into account before implementing endoscopic techniques in settings with limited resources. culdoscopy is not recommended as it carries a higher complication rate.
we conclude that there appears to be little scientific evidence for the effectiveness of multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation compared with other rehabilitation facilities for neck and shoulder pain. multidisciplinary rehabilitation is a commonly used intervention for chronic neck and shoulder complaints, therefore we see an urgent need for high quality trials in this field.
on the basis of a 34% relative risk reduction in mortality, terlipressin should be considered to be effective in the treatment of acute variceal hemorrhage. further, since no other vasoactive agent has been shown to reduce mortality in single studies or meta-analyses, terlipressin might be the vasoactive agent of choice in acute variceal bleeding.
in people with traumatic brain injury, while the addition of hbot may reduce the risk of death and improve the final gcs, there is little evidence that the survivors have a good outcome. the improvement of 2.68 points in gcs is difficult to interpret. this scale runs from three (deeply comatose and unresponsive) to 15 (fully conscious), and the clinical importance of an improvement of approximately three points will vary dramatically with the starting value (for example an improvement from 12 to 15 would represent an important clinical benefit, but an improvement from three to six would leave the patient with severe and highly dependent impairment). the routine application of hbot to these patients cannot be justified from this review. given the modest number of patients, methodological shortcomings of included trials and poor reporting, the results should be interpreted cautiously. an appropriately powered trial of high methodological rigour is required to define which patients, if any, can be expected to benefit most from hbot.
implications for practice based on low quality evidence, the addition of interferon to first-line chemotherapy did not alter the overall survival in post-surgical women with advanced eoc compared with chemotherapy alone. there is low quality evidence to suggest that interferon in combination with chemotherapy worsened the progression free survival in post-surgical women with advanced eoc compared with chemotherapy alone. there is not enough evidence that interferon therapy alone alters overall survival or progression free survival compared to observation alone in post-surgical women who have undergone first-line chemotherapy. implications for research three of the five trials included in this review were stopped early and were, therefore, underpowered to detect any true effect of the intervention. the trials did not report the results of important outcomes in a uniform manner, preventing statistical aggregation of the results. trial methodology was poorly reported resulting in unclear risk of bias. for clear recommendations to be made regarding the effectiveness of interferon in the treatment of advanced eoc, long-term, well conducted and adequately powered rcts would be needed. however, the available data do not suggest that interferon has an adequately advantageous effect to warrant further investigation.
drospirenone 3 mg plus ethinyl estradiol 20 μg may help treat premenstrual symptoms in women with severe symptoms, that is, premenstrual dysphoric disorder. the placebo also had a large effect. we do not know whether the combined oral contraceptive works after three cycles, helps women with less severe symptoms, or is better than other oral contraceptives. larger and longer trials of higher quality are needed to address these issues. trials should follow consort guidelines.
data are scant. some combination treatments appear to be effective at treating malaria in pregnancy; however, safety data are limited.
both natural surfactant extracts and synthetic surfactant extracts are effective in the treatment and prevention of respiratory distress syndrome. comparative trials demonstrate greater early improvement in the requirement for ventilator support, fewer pneumothoraces, and fewer deaths associated with natural surfactant extract treatment. natural surfactant may be associated with an increase in intraventricular hemorrhage, though the more serious hemorrhages (grade 3 and 4) are not increased. despite these concerns, natural surfactant extracts would seem to be the more desirable choice when compared to currently available synthetic surfactants.
the existing evidence does not provide support for the administration of helium-oxygen mixtures to all ed patients with acute asthma. at this time, heliox treatment does not have a role to play in the initial treatment of patients with acute asthma. nevertheless, new evidence suggests certain beneficial effects in patients with more severe obstruction. since these conclusions are based upon between-group comparisons and small studies, they should be interpreted with caution.
corticosteroids are effective for induction of remission in patients with cd, particularly when used for more than 15 weeks. although corticosteroids cause more adverse events than either placebo or low-dose 5-asa, these adverse events did not lead to increased study withdrawal in the included studies. further information is required to determine the optimal duration of treatment and tapering protocol to maximize the efficacy of treatment with corticosteroids. additionally, further study is required to determine whether corticosteroids are more effective in patients with certain phenotypes or when administered intravenously.
there is no evidence for or against the effectiveness of fce compared to no intervention. a short version of fce showed similar effectiveness to a long version in preventing re-injury. more rcts are needed.
azathioprine therapy appears to be more effective than placebo for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine may be effective as maintenance therapy for patients who have failed or cannot tolerate mesalazine or sulfasalazine and for patients who require repeated courses of steroids. more research is needed to evaluate superiority over standard maintenance therapy, especially in the light of a potential for adverse events from azathioprine. this review updates the existing review of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis which was published in the cochrane library (issue 1, 2007).
the available evidence suggests that the hypericum extracts tested in the included trials a) are superior to placebo in patients with major depression; b) are similarly effective as standard antidepressants; c) and have fewer side effects than standard antidepressants. the association of country of origin and precision with effects sizes complicates the interpretation.
there is some evidence that hbot improves local tumour control and mortality for cancers of the head and neck, and local tumour recurrence in cancers of the head and neck, and uterine cervix. these benefits may only occur with unusual fractionation schemes. hbot is associated with significant adverse effects including oxygen toxic seizures and severe tissue radiation injury. the methodological and reporting inadequacies of the studies included demand a cautious interpretation. more research is needed for head and neck cancer, but is probably not justified for bladder cancer. there is little evidence available concerning malignancies at other anatomical sites on which to base a recommendation.
first-line low-dose thiazides reduce all morbidity and mortality outcomes. first-line ace inhibitors and calcium channel blockers may be similarly effective but the evidence is less robust. first-line high-dose thiazides and first-line beta-blockers are inferior to first-line low-dose thiazides.
the evidence did not suggest superior efficacy or patient satisfaction for any one sclerosing agent used in the treatment of telangiectasias of the lower limbs, but the agents studied showed superiority to a normal saline placebo. however, the amount of available evidence in this field is small and the overall methodological quality of the research was poor, as was the quality of reporting. more research is needed to determine the optimal agent(s) and the ideal dosing to achieve the best results and maximize patient satisfaction. future research efforts should incorporate more demographic data and symptom measures to allow for comparison with findings from observational studies, thereby aiding assessment of how various risk groups respond to treatment.
despite most of the included studies being of low quality, the results suggest that iodine supplementation, especially iodised oil, is an effective means of decreasing goitre rates and improving iodine status in children. indications of positive effects on physical and mental development and mortality were seen, although results were not always significant. adverse effects were generally minor and transient. insufficient evidence was available on non-oil supplements. high quality controlled studies investigating relevant long term outcome measures are needed to address the question of the best form of iodine supplementation in different population groups and settings.
there is very low quality evidence in favour of using braces, making generalization very difficult. further research could change the actual results and our confidence in them; in the meantime, patients' choices should be informed by multidisciplinary discussion. future research should focus on short and long-term patient-centred outcomes, in addition to measures such as cobb angles. rcts and prospective cohort studies should follow both the scoliosis resarch society (srs) and society on scoliosis orthopaedic and rehabilitation treatment (sosort) criteria for bracing studies.
the results from the single trial are promising, but more studies with larger samples are needed to investigate the effect of prophylactic steroids in the incidence of neonatal complications per se. also more data and longer follow up would be needed for potential harms and complications.
this systematic review indicates that lithium is an efficacious maintenance treatment for bipolar disorder. in unipolar disorder the evidence of efficacy is less robust. this review does not cover the relative efficacy of lithium compared with other maintenance treatments, which is at present unclear. there is no definitive evidence from this review as to whether or not lithium has an anti-suicidal effect. systematic reviews and large scale randomised studies comparing lithium with other maintenance treatments (e.g. anti-convulsants, antidepressants) are necessary. outcomes relating to death and suicidal behaviour should be included in all future maintenance studies of mood disorder.
these results do not support vitamin d supplementation to improve bone density in healthy children with normal vitamin d levels, but suggest that supplementation of deficient children may be clinically useful. further rcts in deficient children are needed to confirm this.
it is difficult to draft conclusions on the basis of two trials with few participants. furthermore, the two studies included did not consider the efficacy of methadone that is still the most frequent drug utilized for the treatment of opioid withdrawal. one possible reason for the lack of evidence could be the difficulty in conducting trials with young people due to practical and ethical reasons.
trials to date have on the whole been small and of poor methodological quality, making it difficult to offer any definitive recommendations on the role, if any, of house dust mite avoidance measures in the management of house dust mite sensitive perennial allergic rhinitis. the results of these studies suggest that use of acaricides and extensive bedroom-based environmental control programmes may be of some benefit in reducing rhinitis symptoms and, if considered appropriate, these should be the interventions of choice. isolated use of house dust mite impermeable bedding is unlikely to prove effective.
both techniques are valid as they result in similar low recurrence rates. evaluation of pain results in the individual trials shows some evidence that preperitoneal repair causes less or comparable acute and chronic pain compared to the lichtenstein procedure. we emphasize the need for homogeneous high quality randomized trials comparing elective preperitoneal inguinal hernia techniques and lichtenstein repair in terms of chronic pain.
this systematic review questions the beneficial effects of nonabsorbable disaccharides and highlights that there is insufficient high-quality evidence to support this treatment. we found that antibiotics appeared to be superior to nonabsorbable disaccharides in improving hepatic encephalopathy, but it is unclear whether this difference in treatment effect is clinically important to patients. nonabsorbable disaccharides should not serve as comparator in randomised trials on hepatic encephalopathy.
expectant management led to a higher risk of incomplete miscarriage, need for unplanned (or additional) surgical emptying of the uterus, bleeding and need for transfusion. risk of infection and psychological outcomes were similar for both groups. costs were lower for expectant management. given the lack of clear superiority of either approach, the woman's preference should be important in decision making. pharmacological ('medical') management has added choices for women and their clinicians and has been examined in other reviews.
this review found that regular omega-3 supplements may provide some benefits for people with cystic fibrosis with relatively few adverse effects, although evidence is insufficient to draw firm conclusions or recommend routine use of these supplements in people with cystic fibrosis. this review has highlighted the lack of data for many outcomes meaningful to people with or making treatment decisions about cystic fibrosis. a large, long-term, multicentre, randomised controlled study is needed to determine any significant therapeutic effect and to assess the influence of disease severity, dosage and duration of treatment. future researchers should note the need for additional pancreatic enzymes.
few randomised trials have evaluated rest for women with hypertension during pregnancy, and important information on side-effects and cost implication is missing from available trials. although one small trial suggests that some bed rest may be associated with reduced risk of severe hypertension and preterm birth, these findings need to be confirmed in larger trials. at present, there is insufficient evidence to provide clear guidance for clinical practice. therefore, bed rest should not be recommended routinely for hypertension in pregnancy, especially since more women appear to prefer unrestricted activity, if the choice were given.
topical nsaids can provide good levels of pain relief, without the systemic adverse events associated with oral nsaids, when used to treat acute musculoskeletal conditions.
we found no evidence to recommend the use of either nebulized or oral thiol derivatives in people with cystic fibrosis. there are very few good quality trials investigating the effect of these medications in cystic fibrosis, and further research is required to investigate the potential role of these medications in improving the outcomes of people with cystic fibrosis.
meglitinides may offer an alternative oral hypoglycaemic agent of similar potency to metformin, and may be indicated where side effects of metformin are intolerable or where metformin is contraindicated. however, there is no evidence available to indicate what effect meglitinides will have on important long-term outcomes, particularly mortality.
this systematic review indicates that there is no reliable evidence to support, or rule out, the effectiveness of multisensory programmes in patients in coma or vegetative state.
the review is striking for the lack of high quality randomised controlled trials on faecal incontinence surgery that have been carried out in the last 10 years. those trials that have been carried out have focused on sacral neuromodulation and injectable bulking agents, both reported in separate reviews. the continued small number of relevant trials identified together with their small sample sizes and other methodological weaknesses limit the usefulness of this review for guiding practice. it was impossible to identify or refute clinically important differences between the alternative surgical procedures. larger rigorous trials are still needed. however, it should be recognised that the optimal treatment regime may be a complex combination of various surgical and non-surgical therapies.
there is evidence that whitening products work when compared with placebo/no treatment. there are differences in efficacy between the products, mainly due to the levels of active ingredients, hydrogen peroxide and carbamide peroxide. all trials were however short term and the majority of the studies were judged to be at high risk of bias and were either sponsored or conducted by the manufacturers. there is a need for pragmatic long-term and independent clinical studies that include participants representing diverse populations. there is also a need to evaluate long-term harms. several studies reported (where measured) the common side effects of tooth sensitivity and gingival irritation, and people should be informed of this.
in children with a severe asthma exacerbation, the addition of intravenous aminophylline to ß2-agonists and glucocorticoids (with or without anticholinergics) improves lung function within 6 hours of treatment. however there is no apparent reduction in symptoms, number of nebulised treatment and length of hospital stay. there is insufficient evidence to assess the impact on oxygenation, picu admission and mechanical ventilation. aminophylline is associated with a significant increased risk of vomiting.
although fluoride has an ability to increase bmd at lumbar spine, it does not result in a reduction of vertebral fractures. in increasing the dose of fluoride, one increases the risk of non-vertebral fracture and gastrointestinal side effects without any effect on the vertebral fracture rate.
no reliable conclusions can be drawn regarding the efficacy of yoga as a treatment for epilepsy. further studies are needed.
this systematic review gathers information from several controlled clinical trials and observational studies which are vulnerable to different types of bias. the imbalance between characteristics of patients in the allocated groups appears to be the main concern. only one randomised clinical trial (published as an abstract), comparing 60 patients receiving rfa plus ct versus 59 patients receiving ct alone, was identified. this study showed that pfs was significantly higher in the group that received rfa. however, it was not able to provide information on overall survival. in conclusion, evidence from the included studies are insufficient to recommend rfa for a radical oncological treatment of crlms.
in the short-term, center based programs are superior to home based programs in patients with pvd. there is a high possibility of a training effect however as the center based groups were trained primarily on treadmills (and the home based were not) and the outcome measures were treadmill based. there is conflicting evidence which is better in patients with copd. home based programs appear to be superior to center based programs in terms of the adherence to exercise (especially in the long-term)
the evidence from this review highlights the diversity and poor methodological quality of most studies investigating outreach. the results of the two included studies showed either no evidence of the effectiveness of outreach or a reduction in overall mortality in patients receiving outreach. the lack of evidence on outreach requires further multi-site rct's to determine potential effectiveness.
all but one study had moderate to high potential for bias, so results must be viewed cautiously. adding pregnancy-specific exercises, physiotherapy or acupuncture to usual prenatal care appears to relieve back or pelvic pain more than usual prenatal care alone, although the effects are small. we do not know if they actually prevent pain from starting in the first place. water gymnastics appear to help women stay at work. acupuncture shows better results compared to physiotherapy.
based on the best currently available evidence, cephalosporins and penicillins have similar efficacy at caesarean section when considering immediate postoperative infections. we have no data for outcomes on the baby, nor on late infections (up to 30 days) in the mother. clinicians need to consider bacterial resistance and women's individual circumstances.
the results of this systematic review and meta-analysis support matched sibling donor allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation as the optimal post-remission therapy in all patients aged 15 years or over. this therapy offers superior overall survival and disease-free survival, and significantly reduces the risk of disease relapse, but does impose an increased risk of non-relapse mortality. importantly these data are based on adult all treated with largely total body irradiation-based myeloablative conditioning and sibling donor transplantation and, therefore, cannot be generalized to pediatric all, alternative donors including hla (human leukocyte antigen) mismatched or unrelated donors, or reduced toxicity or non-myeloablative conditioning regimens.
no clear benefit can be demonstrated with cisapride. we do not feel that cisapride can be justifiably used for chronic constipation or irritable bowel disease given its side effects of arrhythmia and associated 175 recorded deaths.
in myotonic dystrophy and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, moderate-intensity strength training appears not to do harm but there is insufficient evidence to conclude that it offers benefit. in mitochondrial myopathy, aerobic exercise combined with strength training appears to be safe and may be effective in increasing submaximal endurance capacity. limitations in the design of studies in other muscle diseases prevent more general conclusions in these disorders.
the addition of licensed doses of anti-leukotrienes to add-on therapy to inhaled glucocorticoids brings modest improvement in lung function. although addition of anti-leukotrienes to inhaled glucocorticoids appears comparable to increasing the dose of inhaled steroids, the power of the review is insufficient to confirm the equivalence of both treatment options. addition of anti-leukotrienes is associated with superior asthma control after glucocorticoid tapering; although the glucocorticoid-sparing effect cannot be quantified at present, it appears modest.
this review found inconclusive evidence to decide on the use of creatine analogues in clinical practice. in particular, it is not clear whether there is an effect on mortality, progression of myocardial infarction and ejection fraction, while there is some evidence that dysrhythmia and dyspnoea might improve. however, it is not clear which analogue, dose, route of administration, and duration of therapy is most effective. moreover, given the small sample size of the discussed trials and the heterogeneity of the population included in these reports, larger clinical studies are needed to confirm these observations.
current best evidence shows that antenatal or postpartum vitamin a supplementation probably has little or no effect on mother-to-child transmission of hiv. according to the grade classification, the quality of this evidence is moderate; implying that the true effect of vitamin a supplementation on the risk of mother-to-child transmission of hiv is likely to be close to the findings of this review, but that there is also a possibility that it is substantially different.
there is insufficient evidence to assess which is the best strategy for diagnosing gdm.
early surfactant replacement therapy with extubation to ncpap compared with later selective surfactant replacement and continued mechanical ventilation with extubation from low ventilator support is associated with less need mechanical ventilation, lower incidence of bpd and fewer air leak syndromes. a lower treatment threshold (fio2 < 0.45) confers greater advantage in reducing the incidences of airleak syndromes and bpd; moreover a higher treatment threshold (fio2 at study > 0.45) was associated with increased risk of pda. these data suggest that treatment with surfactant by transient intubation using a low treatment threshold (fio2 < 0.45) is preferable to later, selective surfactant therapy by transient intubation using a higher threshold for study entry (fio2 > 0.45) or at the time of respiratory failure and initiation of mechanical ventilation.
conclusions are based on few small trials, with short follow-up, and judged to be at high risk of bias. therefore conclusions should be viewed as preliminary and interpreted with great caution. it is still unclear when sinus lift procedures are needed. 5 mm short implants can be successfully loaded in maxillary bone with a residual height of 4 to 6 mm but their long-term prognosis is unknown. elevating the sinus lining in presence of 1 to 5 mm of residual bone height without the addition of a bone graft may be sufficient to regenerate new bone to allow rehabilitation with implant-supported prostheses. bone substitutes might be successfully used as replacements for autogenous bone. if the residual alveolar bone height is 3 to 6 mm a crestal approach to lift the sinus lining, to place 8 mm implants may lead to fewer complications than a lateral window approach, to place implants at least 10 mm long. there is no evidence that prp treatment improves the clinical outcome of sinus lift procedures with autogenous bone or bone substitutes.
prophylactic use of heparin for peripherally placed pcvc allows a greater number of infants to complete their intended use (complete therapy) by reducing occlusion. evidence from this systematic review support the prophylactic use of heparin for pcvc in neonates. none of these studies was powered to evaluate a lower incidence rate of adverse events. if this therapy is adopted in routine practice, monitoring of side effects is indicated.
there was a tendency for clinical results to be in favour of arthroplasty; often these were statistically significant. however, differences in effect size were invariably small and not clinically relevant for all primary outcomes. significance was often gained or lost in the varying sensitivity analyses, probably owing to the relatively small number of studies, in combination with the small differences that were found. given the fact that all of the included studies were not blinded, this could be due to patient or carer expectations. however, at this time both treatments can be seen as valid options with respect to results at a maximum of one to two years. given the current absence of truly long-term results, use of these mobile disc prostheses should still be limited to clinical trials.there was high-quality evidence that the goal of preservation of segmental mobility in arthroplasty was met. a statistically significant effect on the incidence of secondary symptoms at adjacent levels, the primary goal of arthroplasty over fusion, was not found at one to two years. if there was a protective effect, this should become clearer over time. a future update, when studies with 'truly long-term' results (five years or more) become available, should focus on this issue.
there is a lack of high quality evidence to recommend the use of sse for ais. one very low quality study suggested that these exercises may be more effective than electrostimulation, traction and postural training to avoid scoliosis progression, but better quality research needs to be conducted before the use of sse can be recommended in clinical practice.
the evidence suggests that a single intravenous dose of dexamethasone is an effective, safe and inexpensive treatment for reducing morbidity from pediatric tonsillectomy.
there was insufficient evidence found to support the effectiveness of nutritional support for aki. further high quality studies are required to provide reliable evidence of the effect and safety of nutritional support.
there is no current evidence to support or refute the routine use of aerosolized prostacyclin for patients with ali and ards. there is an urgent need for more randomized clinical trials.
there is no evidence from randomised controlled trials concerning the benefits or risks of deep versus shallow suctioning of endotracheal tubes in ventilated neonates and infants. further high quality research is required.
trials to date of shortened prophylactic regimens using rifampicin alone have not demonstrated higher rates of active tb when compared to longer regimens with inh. treatment completion is probably higher and adverse events may be fewer with shorter rifampicin regimens. shortened regimens of rifampicin with inh may offer no advantage over longer inh regimens. rifampicin combined with pyrazinamide is associated with more adverse events. a weekly regimen of rifapentine plus inh has higher completion rates, and less liver toxicity, though treatment discontinuation due to adverse events is probably more likely than with inh.
this review of studies has highlighted the paucity of data that exist to support the use of nppv in patients in status asthmaticus. as such this course of treatment remains controversial despite its continued use in current clinical practice. larger, prospective randomised controlled trials of rigorous methodological design are needed to determine the role of nppv in patients with asthma.
non-removable, pressure-relieving casts are more effective in healing diabetes related plantar foot ulcers than removable casts, or dressings alone. non-removable devices, when combined with achilles tendon lengthening were more successful in one forefoot ulcer study than the use of a non-removable cast alone.
the available trial data do not provide evidence of important beneficial or harmful effects of early trophic feeding for very preterm or very low birth weight infants. the applicability of these findings to extremely preterm, extremely low birth weight or growth restricted infants is limited. further randomised controlled trials would be needed to determine how trophic feeding compared with enteral fasting affects important outcomes in this population.
ulinastatin may have a protective effect against ischaemia reperfusion injury relative to gantaile in elective liver resections performed under vascular occlusion. the absolute benefit of this drug agent remains unknown. none of the drugs can be recommended for routine clinical practice. considering that none of the drugs have proven to be useful to decrease ischaemia reperfusion injury, such trials should include a group of patients who do not receive any active intervention whenever possible to determine the pharmacological drug's absolute effects on ischaemia reperfusion injury in liver resections.
quit and win contests at local and regional level appear to deliver quit rates above baseline community rates, although the population impact of the contests seems to be relatively low. contests may be subject to levels of deception which could compromise the validity of the intervention. international contests may prove to be an effective mechanism, particularly in developing countries, but a lack of well-designed comparative studies precludes any firm conclusions.
there is 'silver' level evidence (www.cochranemsk.org) that multidisciplinary intervention that includes exercise may increase the proportion of patients discharged to home and reduce length and cost of hospital stay for acutely hospitalised older medical patients.
at present there is no evidence that the routine use of wound drains at caesarean section confers any benefit to the women involved. however, neither moderate benefit nor harm are excluded. these trials do not answer the question of whether wound drainage is of benefit when haemostasis is not felt to be adequate. further large trials comparing drainage with no drain are justified.
there is weak and unreliable evidence to show that there is a small but statistically significant difference in reduction of vsc levels when tongue scrapers or cleaners rather than toothbrushes are used to reduce halitosis in adults. we found no high level evidence comparing mechanical with other forms of tongue cleaning.
intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis appeared to reduce eogbsd, but this result may well be a result of bias as we found a high risk of bias for one or more key domains in the study methodology and execution. there is lack of evidence from well designed and conducted trials to recommend iap to reduce neonatal eogbsd. ideally the effectiveness of iap to reduce neonatal gbs infections should be studied in adequately sized double-blind controlled trials. the opportunity to conduct such trials has likely been lost, as practice guidelines (albeit without good evidence) have been introduced in many jurisdictions.
artesunate plus mefloquine performs better than mefloquine alone for treating uncomplicated falciparum malaria in areas with low malaria transmission. a total dose of 25 mg/kg mefloquine and at least 10 mg artesunate leads to higher cure rates. better reporting of methods and standardisation of outcomes would help the interpretation of future trials. 2008: as monotherapy is no longer recommended by the world health organization for malaria treatment, the authors do not intend to update this review.
while there is good evidence from observational studies of an association between various lifestyle risk factors and gout development, there is a paucity of high-quality evidence from randomised controlled trials to either support or refute the use of lifestyle modifications for improving outcomes in people with chronic gout.
substantial evidence shows that intensive insulin therapy reduces the incidence of cip/cim, the duration of mechanical ventilation, duration of icu stay and 180-day mortality. there was a significant associated increase in hypoglycaemia. further research needs to identify the clinical impact of this and strategies need to be developed to reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia. limited evidence shows no significant effect of corticosteroids on the incidence of cip/cim, or on any of the other secondary outcome measures, except for a significant reduction of new episodes of shock. strict diagnostic criteria for the purpose of research should be defined. other interventions should be investigated in randomised controlled trials.
the prevalence of hepatic late adverse effects ranged from 7.9% to 52.8% when selecting studies with an adequate outcome definition. it has not been established which childhood cancer treatments result in hepatic late adverse effects. there is a suggestion that chronic viral hepatitis increases the risk of hepatic late adverse effects. more well-designed studies are needed to reliably evaluate the prevalence of, and risk factors for, hepatic late adverse effects after antineoplastic treatment for childhood cancer.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend sweet potato for type 2 diabetes mellitus. improvement in trial methodology as well as addressing the issues of standardization and the quality control of preparations of other varieties of sweet potato are required. for medical nutritional therapy, further observational trials and rcts evaluating the effects of sweet potato are needed to guide any recommendations in clinical practice.
implications for practice closure of the subcutaneous fat may reduce wound complications but it is unclear to what extent these differences affect the well-being and satisfaction of the women concerned. implications for research further trials are justified to investigate whether the apparent increased risk of haematoma or seroma with non-closure of the subcutaneous fat is real. these should use a broader range of short- and long-term outcomes, and ensure that they are adequately powered to detect clinically important differences. further research comparing blunt and sharp needles is justified, as are trials evaluating suturing materials and suturing techniques for the rectus sheath.
oral administration of naftidrofuryl is well-tolerated by patients with dementia.the low-quality evidence shows that, by use of naftidrofuryl, people with dementia may benefit on performance, behaviour, cognition, and mood. however, the benefit on global impression is inconsistent and unconvincing.
bleeding associated with surgery of the cervix appears to be reduced by vasopressin, used in combination with local anaesthetic. tranexamic acid appears to be beneficial after knife and laser cone biopsy. there are insufficient data to assess the effects on primary haemorrhage. there is some evidence that haemostatic suturing has an adverse effect on blood loss, cervical stenosis and satisfactory colposcopy.
there is limited evidence to recommend supplementation of critically ill patients with selenium or ebselen. trials are required which overcome the defects of the reviewed studies, particularly inadequate size and methodology.
limited evidence supports primary surgery for young adults, usually male, engaged in highly demanding physical activities who have sustained their first acute traumatic shoulder dislocation. there is no evidence available to determine which treatment is better for other patient groups. sufficiently powered, good quality, well reported randomised trials are required that compare surgical treatment with conservative treatment for these injuries, including in people at lower risk of recurrence. long-term surveillance of outcome, looking at shoulder disorders including osteoarthritis is also required.
port is detrimental to patients with early stage completely resected non-small cell lung cancer and should not be used in the routine treatment of such patients. the role of port in the treatment of n2 tumours is not clear and may justify further research.
the body of evidence does not permit conclusions on the impact of interventions to modify sexual risk behaviour in homeless youth; more research is required. while the psychosocial and contextual factors that fuel sexual risk behaviours among homeless youth challenge stringent methodologies of rct's, novel ways for program delivery and trial retention are in need of development. future trials should comply with rigorous methodology in design, delivery, outcome measurement and reporting.
conventional therapy combined with a probiotic does not improve overall remission rates in patients with mild to moderate ulcerative colitis. however, there is limited evidence that probiotics added to standard therapy may provide modest benefits in terms of reduction of disease activity in patients with mild to moderately severe ulcerative colitis. whether probiotics are as effective in patients with severe and more extensive disease and whether they can be used as an alternative to existing therapies is unknown. further well designed, larger randomised controlled trials are needed to determine whether probiotics can be used as an alternative to current treatment modalities.
the findings suggest that appropriately trained nurses can produce as high quality care as primary care doctors and achieve as good health outcomes for patients. however, this conclusion should be viewed with caution given that only one study was powered to assess equivalence of care, many studies had methodological limitations, and patient follow-up was generally 12 months or less. while doctor-nurse substitution has the potential to reduce doctors' workload and direct healthcare costs, achieving such reductions depends on the particular context of care. doctors' workload may remain unchanged either because nurses are deployed to meet previously unmet patient need or because nurses generate demand for care where previously there was none. savings in cost depend on the magnitude of the salary differential between doctors and nurses, and may be offset by the lower productivity of nurses compared to doctors.
evidence from two randomized controlled trials suggests that aripiprazole can be effective in treating some behavioral aspects of asd in children. after treatment with aripiprazole, children showed less irritability, hyperactivity, and stereotypies (repetitive, purposeless actions). notable side effects must be considered, however, such as weight gain, sedation, drooling, and tremor. longer studies of aripiprazole in individuals with asd would be useful to gain information on long-term safety and efficacy.
the msp/resa (combination b) vaccine shows promise as a way to reduce the severity of malaria episodes, but the effect of the vaccine is msp2 variant-specific. pretreatment for malaria during a vaccine trial makes the results difficult to interpret, particularly with the relatively small sample sizes of early trials. the results show that blood-stage vaccines may play a role and merit further development.
bone disease, assessed by changes in pth levels, is improved by all vitamin d preparations. however no consistent differences between routes of administration, frequencies of dosing or vitamin d preparations have been demonstrated. though fewer episodes of high calcium levels occurred with the non calcium-containing binder, sevelamer, compared with calcium-containing binders, there were no differences in serum phosphorus and calcium overall and phosphorus values were reduced to similar extents. all rcts were small with few data available on patient-centred outcomes (growth, bone deformities) and limited data on biochemical parameters resulting in considerable imprecision of results thus limiting the applicability to care of children with ckd.
intermittent catheterisation is a critical aspect of healthcare for individuals with incomplete emptying who are otherwise unable to void adequately to protect bladder and renal health. there is a lack of evidence to state that incidence of uti is affected by use of sterile or clean technique, coated or uncoated catheters, single (sterile) or multiple use (clean) catheters, self-catheterisation or catheterisation by others, or by any other strategy. the current research evidence is weak and design issues are significant. in light of the current climate of infection control and antibiotic resistance, further, well-designed studies are strongly recommended. based on the current data, it is not possible to state that one catheter type, technique or strategy is better than another.
psychoeducation does seem to reduce relapse, readmission and encourage medication compliance, as well as reduce the length of hospital stay in these hospital-based studies of limited quality. the true size of effect is likely to be less than demonstrated in this review - but, nevertheless, some sort of psychoeducation could be clinically effective and potentially cost beneficial. it is not difficult to justify better, more applicable, research in this area aimed at fully investigating the effects of this promising approach. note: the 27 new citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
the three cholinesterase inhibitors are efficacious for mild to moderate alzheimer's disease. despite the slight variations in the mode of action of the three cholinesterase inhibitors there is no evidence of any differences between them with respect to efficacy. the evidence from one large trial shows fewer adverse events associated with donepezil compared with rivastigmine.
there is good evidence from three trials that open mesh repair is superior to suture repair in terms of recurrences, but inferior when considering wound infection. six trials yielded insufficient evidence as to which type of mesh or which mesh position (on- or sublay) should be used. there was also insufficient evidence to advocate the use of the components separation technique.
it appears that im and iv administration of anti-d are equally effective. the number of included studies and the number of participants are not enough to assess whether there are any differences. anti-d can be administered by im or iv injection. the choice of im or iv route of administration will depend on the available preparations, the dose to be administered and also on the patients' preferences. this review found insufficient information upon which to guide practice due to the limited number of included studies, small sample sizes and methodological limitations.
in summary, colony-stimulating factors should not be given routinely to acute myelogenous leukemia patients post-chemotherapy since they do not affect overall survival or infectious parameters including the rate of bacteremias and invasive fungal infections.
the studies confirmed that pulse oximetry can detect hypoxaemia and related events. however, we have found no evidence that pulse oximetry affects the outcome of anaesthesia for patients. the conflicting subjective and objective results of the studies, despite an intense methodical collection of data from a relatively large general surgery population, indicate that the value of perioperative monitoring with pulse oximetry is questionable in relation to improved reliable outcomes, effectiveness, and efficiency. routine continuous pulse oximetry monitoring did not reduce either transfer to icu or mortality, and it is unclear if there is any real benefit from the application of this technology in patients who are recovering from cardiothoracic surgery in a general care area.
this review does not demonstrate any significant overall benefit of a permissive hypercapnia/minimal ventilation strategy compared to a routine ventilation strategy. at present, therefore, these ventilation strategies cannot be recommended to reduce mortality, or pulmonary and neurodevelopmental morbidity. ventilatory strategies which target high levels of pco2 (> 55 mmhg) should only be undertaken in the context of well-designed controlled clinical trials. these trials should aim to establish the safe, or ideal, range for co2 in ventilated newborns, and examine the role of protective ventilatory techniques in achieving this target.
there is low quality evidence that antispasmodics reduce the duration of first stage of labour and increase the cervical dilatation rate. there is very low quality evidence that antispasmodics reduce the total duration of labour. there is moderate quality evidence that antispasmodics do not affect the rate of normal vertex deliveries. there is insufficient evidence to make any conclusions regarding the safety of these drugs for both mother and baby. large, rigorous randomised controlled trials are needed to evaluate the effect of antispasmodics on prolonged labour and to evaluate their effect on labour in a context of expectant management of labour.
we were unable to fully assess the benefits or harms of supplementation or to determine the impact from timing and type of supplementation . we found no benefit to newborn infants and possible negative effects on the duration of breastfeeding from the brief use of additional water or glucose water. for infants at four to six months, we found no benefit from additional foods nor any risks related to morbidity or weight change. future studies should examine the longer term effects on infants and mothers, though randomising infants to receive supplements without medical need may be considered unethical. we found no evidence for disagreement with the recommendation of international health associations that exclusive breastfeeding should be recommended for healthy infants for the first six months.
at 5 mg/day a statistically significant and clinically important benefit in the secondary prevention of vertebral, non-vertebral and hip fractures was observed, but not for wrist. the level of evidence for secondary prevention is gold (www.cochranemsk.org) for vertebral and non-vertebral and silver for hip and wrist. there were no statistically significant reductions in the primary prevention of vertebral and non-vertebral fractures. the level of evidence is silver.
in our original cochrane review, we concluded that there was no evidence to show that any intervention, be it pharmacological or non-pharmacological, was superior to placebo in the treatment of noisy breathing. this conclusion has not changed. we acknowledge that in the face of heightened emotions when death is imminent, it is difficult for staff not to intervene. it is therefore likely that the current therapeutic options will continue to be used. however, patients need to be closely monitored for lack of therapeutic benefit and adverse effects while relatives need time, explanation and reassurance to relieve their fears and concerns. there remains a need for well-designed multi-centre studies with objective outcome measures which demonstrates the efficacy of intervention against placebo for this condition.
antiplatelet therapy with aspirin had a slight beneficial effect on the patency of peripheral bypass grafts but seemed to have an inferior effect on venous graft patency compared with artificial grafts. the effect of aspirin on cardiovascular outcomes and survival was small and not statistically significant. this might be due to the fact that the majority of patients receiving a peripheral graft have an advanced stage of pad with critical ischaemia. they are usually seriously ill as a result of cardiovascular disease and have high mortality rates, of 20% per year. additionally, the number of patients included in this analysis might be too small to reach a statistically significant effect for mortality and cardiovascular morbidity.
there is some indication that family therapy may be a useful adjunct to medication for children with asthma. this conclusion is limited by small study sizes and lack of standardisation in the choice of outcome measures.
pair seems promising, but there is insufficient evidence to support or refute pair with or without benzimidazole coverage for treating patients with uncomplicated hepatic hydatid cyst. further well-designed randomised clinical trials are necessary to address the topic.
this review found a significant decrease in length of stay in preterm infants receiving a nns intervention. the review did not reveal a consistent benefit of nns with respect to other major clinical variables (weight gain, energy intake, heart rate, oxygen saturation, intestinal transit time, age at full oral feeds and behavioral state). the review identified other positive clinical outcomes of nns: transition from tube to bottle feeds and better bottle feeding performance. no negative outcomes were reported in any of the studies. there were also a number of limitations of the presently available evidence related to the design of the studies, outcome variability, and lack of long-term data. based on the available evidence, nns in preterm infants would appear to have some clinical benefit. it does not appear to have any short-term negative effects.
there is inadequate reliable evidence from trials of immunotherapies in anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein paraproteinaemic neuropathy to form an evidence base supporting any particular immunotherapy treatment. there is very low quality evidence of benefit from rituximab. large well designed randomised trials of at least six to 12 months duration are required to assess existing or novel therapies, preferably employing unified, consistent, well designed, responsive and valid outcome measures.
although the mechanism of action of the topical medicinal plant products provides a rationale basis for their use in the treatment of osteoarthritis, the quality and quantity of current research studies of effectiveness are insufficient. arnica gel probably improves symptoms as effectively as a gel containing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, but with no better (and possibly worse) adverse event profile. comfrey extract gel probably improves pain, and capsicum extract gel probably will not improve pain or function at the doses examined in this review. further high quality, fully powered studies are required to confirm the trends of effectiveness identifed in studies so far.
there is insufficient evidence to be able to say whether or not physical activity programs are beneficial for people with dementia.
given the high prevalence of nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy, health professionals need to provide clear guidance to women, based on systematically reviewed evidence. there is a lack of high-quality evidence to support that advice. the difficulties in interpreting the results of the studies included in this review highlight the need for specific, consistent and clearly justified outcomes and approaches to measurement in research studies.
the conclusions of this update have changed to suggest that intravenous lorazepam is at least as effective as intravenous diazepam and is associated with fewer adverse events in the treatment of acute tonic-clonic convulsions. where intravenous access is unavailable there is evidence from one trial that buccal midazolam is the treatment of choice.
the results of this review are inconclusive. whether the use of new generation antipsychotics really makes the treatment less off putting and enhances long-term compliance is unclear. pragmatic, well-designed and reported long-term trials would be useful to answer this question.
overall there was insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of electronic retrieval of healthcare information by healthcare providers to improve practice and patient care.
there is some limited evidence of favourable outcomes for treatment of postpartum anaemia with erythropoietin. however, most of the available literature focuses on laboratory haematological indices, rather than clinical outcomes. further high-quality trials assessing the treatment of postpartum anaemia with iron supplementation and blood transfusions are required. future trials may also examine the significance of the severity of anaemia in relation to treatment, and an iron-rich diet as an intervention. [note: the 27 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the evidence suggests that there is a potential benefit in using phlebotonics in treating haemorrhoidal disease as well as a benefit in alleviating post-haemorrhoidectomy symptoms. outcomes such as bleeding and overall symptom improvement show a statistically significant beneficial effect and there were few concerns regarding their overall safety from the evidence presented in the clinical trials. however methodological limitations were encountered. in order to enhance our conclusion further, more robust clinical trials which take into account these limitations will need to be performed in the future.
etas appear to reduce dind and angiographic vasospasm but there were adverse events and the impact on clinical outcome is unclear. additional well-designed rcts are needed.
tiagabine reduces seizure frequency but is associated with some adverse effects when used as an add-on for people with drug-resistant localisation-related seizures.
based on the limited evidence that we found, lcpufa supplementation did not appear to improve children's neurodevelopment or visual acuity. in two studies, lcpufa supplementation was associated with increased head circumference. currently, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the practice of giving lcpufa supplementation to breastfeeding mothers in order to improve infant growth and development.
this updated review of rcts conducted almost 20 years ago suggest that follow-up programs based on regular physical examinations and yearly mammography alone are as effective as more intensive approaches based on regular performance of laboratory and instrumental tests in terms of timeliness of recurrence detection, overall survival and quality of life. in one rct, follow-up care performed by trained general practitioners working in an organized practice setting had comparable effectiveness to that delivered by hospital-based specialists in terms of quality of life and time to detection of distant metastases.
there was improved short-term postoperative outcome if the peritoneum was not closed. this in itself can support those who opt not to close the peritoneum. long-term studies following caesarean section are limited; there is therefore no overall evidence for non-closure until long-term data become available. [note: the 18 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is currently no evidence that auricular acupuncture is effective for the treatment of cocaine dependence. the evidence is not of high quality and is inconclusive. further randomised trials of auricular acupuncture may be justified.
the review provides support for the widespread recommendation that pfmt be included in first-line conservative management programmes for women with stress, urge, or mixed, urinary incontinence. statistical heterogeneity reflecting variation in incontinence type, training, and outcome measurement made interpretation difficult. the treatment effect seems greater in women with stress urinary incontinence alone, who participate in a supervised pfmt programme for at least three months, but these and other uncertainties require testing in further trials.
there is no convincing evidence from the trials identified that blood pressure lowering in late-life prevents the development of dementia or cognitive impairment in hypertensive patients with no apparent prior cerebrovascular disease. there were significant problems identified with analysing the data, however, due to the number of patients lost to follow-up and the number of placebo patients who received active treatment. this introduced bias. more robust results may be obtained by conducting a meta-analysis using individual patient data.
there were insufficient data to quantify the safety and effectiveness of oestrogen as an induction agent; they should only be used as part of randomised control trials as there are alternative effective options for inducting labour.
the four included randomised controlled trials in this systematic review provided insufficient evidence to assess whether progestogen-only and combined contraceptives differ from non-hormonal contraceptives in diabetes control, lipid metabolism and complications. three of the four studies were of limited methodological quality, sponsored by pharmaceutical companies and described surrogate outcomes. ideally, an adequately reported, high-quality randomised controlled trial analysing both intermediate outcomes (that is glucose and lipid metabolism) and true clinical endpoints (micro- and macrovascular disease) in users of combined, progestogen-only and non-hormonal contraceptives should be conducted. however, due to the low incidence of micro- and macrovascular disease and accordingly the large sample size and long follow-up period needed to observe differences in risk, a randomised controlled trial might not be the ideal design.
these results endorse the recommendations of the nci alert, but also demonstrate their applicability to all women and a benefit of non-platinum based chemoradiotherapy. furthermore, although these results suggest an additional benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy this requires testing in rcts.
the quality of intervention studies intended to increase hand hygiene compliance remains disappointing. although multifaceted campaigns with social marketing or staff involvement appear to have an effect, there is insufficient evidence to draw a firm conclusion. there remains an urgent need to undertake methodologically robust research to explore the effectiveness of soundly designed and implemented interventions to increase hand hygiene compliance.
lumiracoxib 400 mg given as a single oral dose is an effective analgesic for acute postoperative pain, and has a relatively long duration of action. adverse events with lumiracoxib did not differ from placebo.
psychological treatments appear effective in treating psychological symptoms of chd patients. uncertainly remains regarding the subgroups of patients who would benefit most from treatment and the characteristics of successful interventions.
there are not enough data to recommend or discourage the use of beta-blockers in children with congestive heart failure. further investigations in clearly defined populations with standardised methodology are required to establish guidelines for therapy. pharmacokinetic investigations of beta-blockers in children are required to provide effective dosing in future trials.
there is currently no evidence from rcts to suggest that increased dietary fibre intake will reduce the incidence or recurrence of adenomatous polyps within a two to four year period.
it is difficult to draw reliable conclusions given the way the data were analysed and reported in the two included studies. the reliability of the results is uncertain. however, given the caution in interpreting these data, it should also be noted that the use of intermittent flushes was not associated in either study with a decreased cannula life or any other disadvantages, thus lending some support for the use of intermittent flushing of cannulas in a selected population in neonatal nurseries.
we found no evidence that the systemic interventions for untreated patients with aids-related nhl provide superior clinical effectiveness for improving os, dsf, and tumour response rate; however, this conclusion is based on four rcts with limited sample size and variable quality. more adequately powered rcts that have low risk of bias are necessary to determine the real benefit or harm of interventions to treat this population. overall survival (os), dfs, and quality of life should be included as endpoints.
home uterine monitoring may result in fewer admissions to a neonatal intensive care unit but more unscheduled antenatal visits and tocolytic treatment. there is no impact on maternal and perinatal outcomes such as perinatal mortality or incidence of preterm birth.
at present, too few patients have been studied to draw any definite conclusions about the effects of amphetamine treatment on recovery from stroke. the suggested benefits on motor function and the non-significant trend towards increased risk of death could be related to imbalances in prognostic variables or other bias in the studies. further research is therefore justified.
current evidence does not support the use of acupuncture for treatment of asd. there is no conclusive evidence that acupuncture is effective for treatment of asd in children and no rcts have been carried out with adults. further high quality trials of larger size and longer follow-up are needed.
there is insufficient evidence to assess the use of capsaicin in clinical practice.
there is insufficient evidence to decide whether otc medications for cough associated with acute pneumonia are beneficial. mucolytics may be beneficial but there is insufficient evidence to recommend them as an adjunctive treatment for acute pneumonia. this leaves only theoretical recommendations that otc medications containing codeine and antihistamines should not be used in young children.
the use of anticholinergic drugs in the management of overactive bladder syndrome is well established when compared to placebo treatment. during initial treatment of overactive bladder syndrome there was more symptomatic improvement when (a) anticholinergics were compared with bladder training alone, and (b) anticholinergics combined with bladder training were compared with bladder training alone. limited evidence from small trials might suggest electrical stimulation is a better option in patients who are refractory to anticholinergic therapy, but more evidence comparing individual types of electrostimulation to the most effective types of anticholinergics is required to establish this. these results should be viewed with caution in view of the different classes and varying doses of individual anticholinergics used in this review. anticholinergics had well recognised side effects, such as dry mouth.
magnesium sulphate, rather than phenytoin, for women with eclampsia reduces the risk ratio of recurrence of seizures, probably reduces the risk of maternal death, and improves outcome for the baby. magnesium sulphate is the drug of choice for women with eclampsia. the use of phenytoin should be abandoned.
there is insufficient evidence to guide selection of appropriate peep levels for rds or cmv. there is a need for well designed clinical trials evaluating the optimal application of this important and frequently applied intervention.
the use of laparoscopic surgery in the treatment of subfertility related to minimal and mild endometriosis may improve future fertility.
there is no reliable evidence suggesting which could be the most effective interventions for treating peri-implantitis. this is not to say that currently used interventions are not effective. a single small trial at unclear risk of bias showed the use of local antibiotics in addition to manual subgingival debridement was associated with a 0.6 mm additional improvement for pal and ppd over a 4-month period in patients affected by severe forms of peri-implantitis. another small single trial at high risk of bias showed that after 4 years, improved pal and ppd of about 1.4 mm were obtained when using bio-oss with resorbable barriers compared to a nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite in peri-implant infrabony defects. there is no evidence from four trials that the more complex and expensive therapies were more beneficial than the control therapies which basically consisted of simple subgingival mechanical debridement. follow-up longer than 1 year suggested recurrence of peri-implantitis in up to 100% of the treated cases for some of the tested interventions. as this can be a chronic disease, re-treatment may be necessary. larger well-designed rcts with follow-up longer than 1 year are needed.
there is inconclusive evidence of the effectiveness of mst compared with other interventions with youth.there is no evidence that mst has harmful effects.
the pooled analyses suggest that 5-asa preparations may be superior to placebo for the maintenance of surgically-induced remission in patients with cd. the results of the pooled analyses should be interpreted with caution because adequately powered studies demonstrated no difference and publication bias (failure to publish negative studies) may be an issue. the potential benefit provided by 5-asa drugs is modest with a number needed to treat of approximately 16 to 19 patients to avoid one relapse which raises issues about the cost-effectiveness of this therapy. however, 5-asa drugs are safe and well tolerated. the incidence of adverse events was not different in patients receiving 5-asa compared with those receiving placebo. there is insufficient evidence to allow any conclusions on how 5-asa preparations compare with azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine.
there is no evidence from randomised controlled trials to support any drug treatment for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy but only two randomised controlled trials have been published.
intraoperative mmc reduces the risk of surgical failure in eyes that have undergone no previous surgery and in eyes at high risk of failure. compared to placebo it reduces mean iop at 12 months in all groups of participants in this review. apart from an increase in cataract formation following mmc, there was insufficient power to detect any increase in other serious side effects such as endophthalmitis.
preterm infants with rds are unlikely to benefit from at treatment and may be harmed.
the lack of randomised clinical trials and quasi-randomised clinical studies precludes us to assess the benefits and harms of bariatric surgery as a therapeutic approach for patients with nash. limitations of all other studies with inferior design did not allow us to draw any unbiased conclusion on bariatric surgery for treatment of nash.
sub-tenon anaesthesia provides better pain relief than topical anaesthesia for cataract surgery.
since the last version of this review no new studies were found that met the inclusion criteria. given the unclear risk of bias in the included studies, the results of this analysis have to be interpreted with caution. analysis of all included patients, srs plus wbrt, did not show a survival benefit over wbrt alone. however, performance status and local control were significantly better in the srs plus wbrt group. furthermore, significantly longer os was reported in the combined treatment group for recursive partitioning analysis (rpa) class i patients as well as patients with single metastasis.
there is insufficient evidence for any reliable estimates of the effects of plasma volume expansion for women with pre-eclampsia. [note: the 14 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the evidence presented in this review was based on a few relatively small-sized studies that were categorised to have unclear to high risk of bias, which does not allow confident decision-making at present about the use of beta2-adrenoceptor agonists for dysmenorrhoea. the benefits as reported in one study should be balanced against the wide array of unacceptable side effects documented with this class of medication. we have emphasised the lack of precision and limitations in the reported data where appropriate.
we conclude that there is moderate evidence of positive effectiveness of multidisciplinary rehabilitation for subacute low back pain and that a workplace visit increases the effectiveness. but because this evidence is based on trials that had some methodological shortcomings, and several expensive multidisciplinary rehabilitation programmes are commonly used for uncomplicated/non-specific subacute low back problems, there is an obvious need for high quality trials in this field.
implications for practice. after general anaesthesia, caffeine can be used to prevent postoperative apnoea/bradycardia and episodes of oxygen desaturation in growing preterm infants if this is deemed clinically necessary. in view of the small numbers of infants studied in these trials and uncertainty concerning the clinical significance of the episodes, caution is warranted in applying these results to routine clinical practice. implications for research. there is a need to determine which infants might benefit most by this treatment. studies confined to those most at risk of apnoea (prior history, younger postmenstrual age) and those that might require mechanical ventilation or chronic lung disease would be of value.
intranasal sumatriptan is effective as an abortive treatment for acute migraine attacks, relieving pain, nausea, photophobia, phonophobia, and functional disability, but is associated with increased adverse events compared with placebo.
this review found minimal evidence to support the use of antibiotics for bronchiolitis. research to identify a possible small subgroup of patients who have complications from bronchiolitis such as respiratory failure and who may benefit from antibiotics is justified.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials comparing arthroscopic with open surgery for treating anterior shoulder instability. further research is needed on this subject and for other surgical interventions. sufficiently powered, good quality, well reported randomised controlled trials with validated outcome measures and long-term follow up are required.
there is some evidence to suggest that interventions to increase the uptake of cardiac rehabilitation can be effective. few practice recommendations for increasing adherence to cardiac rehabilitation can be made at this time. interventions targeting patient identified barriers may increase the likelihood of success. further high quality research is needed.
methotrexate had no statistically significant effect on mortality in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis nor the need for liver transplantation. although methotrexate may benefit other outcomes (pruritus score, serum alkaline phosphatase, immunoglobulin m levels), there is no sufficient evidence to support methotrexate for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
we have found some evidence to support the policy of using carbamazepine as the first treatment of choice in partial epilepsies, but no evidence to support the choice of valproate in generalized epilepsies, but confidence intervals are too wide to confirm equivalence. misclassification of people with epilepsy may have confounded our results, and has important implications for the design and conduct of future trials.
there is evidence to suggest that hydrogel increases the healing rate of diabetic foot ulcers compared with gauze dressings or standard care. there is insufficient evidence (one small trial, abstract only) of the effects of larval therapy on diabetic foot ulcers. more research is needed to evaluate the effects of a range of widely used debridement methods and of debridement per se.
the available evidence is insufficient to establish the effectiveness of surfactant therapy for bronchiolitis in critically ill infants who require mechanical ventilation. there is a need for larger trials with adequate power and a cost-effectiveness analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of exogenous surfactant therapy for infants with bronchiolitis who require intensive care management.
omega 3 fatty acids are safe but probably ineffective for maintenance of remission in cd. the existing data do not support routine maintenance treatment of crohn's disease with omega 3 fatty acids.
there is no evidence from the published studies that intrauterine insemination is an effective treatment for cervical hostility. given the poor diagnostic and prognostic properties of the postcoital test and the observation that the test has no benefit on pregnancy rates, intrauterine insemination (with or without ovarian stimulation) is unlikely to be a useful treatment for putative problems identified by postcoital testing.
psychosocial treatments offered in addition to pharmacological detoxification treatments are effective in terms of completion of treatment, use of opiate, participants abstinent at follow-up and clinical attendance. the evidence produced by this review is limited due to the small number of participants included in the studies, the heterogeneity of the assessment or the lack of detailed outcome information that prevented the possibility of cumulative analysis for several outcomes. nevertheless it seems desirable to develop adjunct psychosocial approaches that might make detoxification more effective.
in view of the limited information from small studies of uncertain quality, no firm recommendations for clinical practice can be made. it appears that the combination of insulin and glucose is preferred over treatment with rectal cation-resin for hyperkalaemia in preterm infants. both the combination of insulin and glucose and albuterol inhalation deserve further study. the two interventions could possibly be tested against each other. the effectiveness of other potentially effective interventions for non-oliguric hyperkalaemia (diuretics, exchange transfusion, peritoneal dialysis and calcium) have not been tested in randomised controlled trials.
nsaids caused a clinically unimportant transient reduction in renal function in the early postoperative period in patients with normal preoperative renal function. nsaids should not be withheld from adults with normal preoperative renal function because of concerns about postoperative renal impairment.
tor-i have been evaluated in four different primary immunosuppressive algorithms; as replacement for cni and for antimetabolites, in combination with cni at low and high dose and with variable dose of cni. generally, surrogate endpoints for graft survival favour tor-i (lower risk of acute rejection and higher gfr) and surrogate endpoints for patient outcomes are worsened by tor-i (bone marrow suppression, lipid disturbance). long-term hard-endpoint data from methodologically robust rcts are still needed.
due to poor quality of included trials and heterogeneity between trials, the evidence in favour of causal association between calcium supplementation and blood pressure reduction is weak and is probably due to bias. this is because poor quality studies generally tend to over-estimate the effects of treatment. larger, longer duration and better quality double-blind placebo controlled trials are needed to assess the effect of calcium supplementation on blood pressure and cardiovascular outcomes.
there is no evidence of benefit for antibiotics in nts diarrhoea in otherwise healthy people. we are uncertain of the effects in very young people, very old people, and in people with severe and extraintestinal disease. a slightly higher number of adverse events were noted in people who received antibiotic treatment for nts.
the literature indicates that digitalis may have a useful role in the treatment of patients with hf who are in normal sinus rhythm. new trials are needed to elucidate the importance of digitalis dosage, and its usefulness in the era of beta-blockers and other agents shown to be effective in treating hf.
evidence from one small trial suggests that needling of encapsulated trabeculectomy blebs is not better than medical treatment in reducing intraocular pressure.
danazol is effective in treating the symptoms and signs of endometriosis. however, its use is limited by the occurrence of androgenic side effects.
there is some limited evidence that antibiotic medication may have a slight protective effect in retarding the expansion rates of small aaas. the quality of the evidence makes it unclear whether this translates into fewer referrals to aaa surgery, owing mainly to the small sample sizes of the studies. antibiotics were generally well tolerated with minimal adverse effects. propranolol was poorly tolerated by patients in all of the beta-blocker trials and demonstrated only minimal and non-significant protective effects. further research on beta-blockers for aaa needs to consider the use of drugs other than propranolol. in general, there is surprisingly little high quality evidence on medical treatment for small aaas, especially in relation to the use of newer beta-blockers, ace inhibitors and statins.
this meta-analysis suggests that lmwh reduces the incidence of distal dvt diagnosed by sonogram. the clinical benefit of this is uncertain. no strong evidence was found to conclude thromboprophylaxis is effective to prevent thromboembolic events and safe, in people with unknown risk factors for thrombosis, undergoing knee arthroscopy.
a favourable effect of computer assisted surgery for cruciate ligament reconstructions of the knee compared with conventional reconstructions could neither be demonstrated nor refuted. there is insufficient evidence to advise for or against the use of cas. there is a need for improved reporting of future studies of this technology.
there are no published double-blind, placebo-controlled rcts of pegloticase. more evidence is needed to assess risks/benefits of pegloticase in patients with chronic gout.
several agents with specified molecular targets have demonstrated clinically useful benefits over interferon-alfa, and also after either prior cytokine or initial anti-angiogenesis therapy. more research is required to fully establish the role of targeted agents in this condition.
although a variety of treatments have been proposed for bleb leaks, there is no evidence of their comparative effectiveness. the evidence in this review was provided by a single trial that compared two surgical procedures (conjunctival advancement and amniotic membrane transplant). the trial did show a superiority of conjunctival advancement, which was regarded as standard treatment, to amniotic membrane transplantation. there is a need for more randomised trials to validate the findings of this single trial and provide more information on the different types of interventions, especially non-surgical treatments compared to surgical procedures. we recommend that any intervention should be compared to a standard procedure, which is to date conjunctival advancement.
the evidence does not support the routine use of doxapram to assist endotracheal extubation in preterm infants who are eligible for methylxanthine and/or cpap. the results should be interpreted with caution because the small number of infants studied does not allow reliable assessment of the benefits and harms of doxapram. further trials are required to evaluate the benefits and harms of doxapram compared with no treatment or with other treatments, such as methylxanthines or cpap, to evaluate whether it is more effective in infants not responding to these other treatments, and to assess whether the drug is effective when given orally.
best available evidence from trials suggests that most people who start quetiapine stop taking it within a few weeks. comparisons with amisulpride, aripiprazole, sertindole and zotepine do not exist. most data that has been reported within existing comparisons are of very limited value because of assumptions and biases within them. there is much scope for further research into the effects of this widely used drug.
endometrial resection and ablation offers an alternative to hysterectomy as a surgical treatment for heavy menstrual bleeding. both procedures are effective and satisfaction rates are high. although hysterectomy is associated with a longer operating time, a longer recovery period and higher rates of post-operative complications, it offers permanent relief from heavy menstrual bleeding. the initial cost of endometrial destruction is significantly lower than hysterectomy but, since re-treatment is often necessary, the cost difference narrows over time.
there is currently no conclusive evidence about how the skin should be closed after caesarean section. staples are associated with similar outcomes in terms of wound infection, pain and cosmesis compared with sutures, and these two are the most commonly studied methods for skin closure after caesarean section. if staples are removed on day three, there is an increased incidence of skin separation and the need for reclosure compared with absorbable sutures.
evidence derived from small trials suggests that preoperative physical therapy reduces postoperative pulmonary complications (atelectasis and pneumonia) and length of hospital stay in patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery. there is a lack of evidence that preoperative physical therapy reduces postoperative pneumothorax, prolonged mechanical ventilation or all-cause deaths.
this systematic review highlights the relative scarcity of controlled clinical trials assessing the efficacy of topical csa therapy in akc and suggests that evidence on the efficacy and safety of topical csa treatment in patients with csa remains limited. however, the data suggest that topical csa may provide clinical and symptomatic relief in akc and may help to reduce topical steroid use in patients with steroid-dependent or steroid-resistant akc. no serious adverse events were reported. reported adverse events in patients treated with topical csa include intense stinging and eyelid skin maceration. one patient in the placebo group developed a severe allergic response to maize antigens. however, the total number of patients in the trials was too small to assess the safety of this treatment. additional well-designed and powered rcts of topical csa in akc are needed. ideal study designs should include adequate randomisation and concealment of allocation; masking of participants, personnel and outcome assessors; adequate follow-up periods and minimisation of attrition bias; and comparison groups with similar clinical and epidemiologic characteristics. samples should be large enough to provide sufficient statistical power to assess the safety of csa and to detect clinically relevant treatment effect sizes of the primary outcomes. analyses should be appropriate to the study’s design and outcome measures. moreover, standardisation of outcome measures and follow-up periods across studies would be beneficial to maximise study comparability.
we failed to find clear evidence of benefit for antimicrobial interventions for people with atopic eczema, despite their widespread use. this does not necessarily mean they do not work because the studies were small and poorly reported. further large studies with long-term outcomes and clearly defined participants are urgently required.
at present, there are insufficient robust data to inform clinical use of electrostimulation for neuromuscular re-training. research is needed to address specific questions about the type of electrostimulation that might be most effective, in what dose and at what time after stroke.
the presence of a diabetes specialist nurse / nurse case manager may improve patients' diabetic control over short time periods, but from currently available trials the effects over longer periods of time are not evident. there were no significant differences overall in hypoglycaemic episodes, hyperglycaemic incidents, or hospital admissions. quality of life was not shown to be affected by input from a diabetes specialist nurse/nurse case manager.
the information in this review suggests that there is no strong evidence for benefit from using transcranial magnetic stimulation to treat depression, although the small sample sizes do not exclude the possibility of benefit.
moderate to high quality evidence from two small trials showed that plasma exchange provides significant short-term improvement in disability, clinical impairment and motor nerve conduction velocity in cidp but rapid deterioration may occur afterwards. adverse events related to difficulty with venous access, use of citrate and haemodynamic changes are not uncommon. more research is needed to identify agents which will prolong the beneficial action of plasma exchange.
there is currently no evidence to suggest that autologous prp is of value for treating chronic wounds. however, current evidence is based on a small number of rcts, most of which are either at high or unclear risk of bias. well-designed and adequately powered clinical trials are needed.
no evidence was found that supports the use of omega 3 fatty acids for maintenance of remission in uc. further studies using enteric coated capsules may be justified.
included studies were of poor methodologic quality, and did not systematically evaluate seizure frequency and adverse events, so that it was impossible to summarize data in a meta-analysis. it is not possible to draw any conclusion about the role of melatonin in reducing seizure frequency or improving quality of life in patients with epilepsy.
we found no evidence for effects of isoflavones on patient-important outcomes or lowering of cholesterol levels in people with hypercholesterolaemia. our findings have to be interpreted with caution due to high or unclear risk of bias in several risk of bias domains, and low number of participants in trials.
despite dronabinol being registered by at least some medicines regulatory authorities for the treatment of aids-associated anorexia, and some jurisdictions making allowances for the "medical" use of marijuana by patients with hiv/aids, evidence for the efficacy and safety of cannabis and cannabinoids in this setting is lacking. such studies as have been performed have been of short duration, in small numbers of patients, and have focused on short-term measures of efficacy. long-term data, showing a sustained effect on aids-related morbidity and mortality and safety in patients on effective antiretroviral therapy, has yet to be presented. whether the available evidence is sufficient to justify a wide-ranging revisiting of medicines regulatory practice remains unclear.
there is not enough evidence to assess adequately the effectiveness and safety of methylxanthines after acute ischaemic stroke.
the available evidence suggests that medical treatment, with misoprostol, and expectant care are both acceptable alternatives to routine surgical evacuation given the availability of health service resources to support all three approaches. women experiencing miscarriage at less than 13 weeks should be offered an informed choice. future studies should include long-term follow-up.
there are insufficient data to support or refute the use of nebulised surfactant in clinical practice. adequately powered trials are required to determine the effect of nebulised surfactant administration for prevention or early treatment of rds in preterm infants. nebulised surfactant administration should be limited to clinical trials.
oral lactoferrin prophylaxis reduces the incidence of late-onset sepsis in infants weighing less than 1500 g and most effective in infants weighing less than 1000 g. there is no evidence of efficacy of oral lactoferrin (given alone) in the prevention of nec in preterm neonates. well designed, randomized trials should address dosing, duration, type of lactoferrin (bovine or human) prophylaxis in prevention of sepsis and nec. the effect of exclusive maternal milk feeding should be clarified.
no single intervention has been shown to be convincingly effective in the treatment of molluscum contagiosum. the update identified six new studies, most of them reporting on interventions not included in the original version. however, the conclusions of the review did not change.
surgical interventions are more effective than non-surgical interventions in preventing the recurrence of an ingrowing toenail. in the studies comparing a surgical intervention to a surgical intervention with the application of phenol, the addition of phenol is probably more effective in preventing recurrence and regrowth of the ingrowing toenail. because there is only one study in which the surgical interventions in both study arms were equal, more studies have to be done to confirm these outcomes. postoperative interventions do not decrease the risk of postoperative infection, postoperative pain, or healing time.
in adults with asthma that is inadequately controlled on low doses of inhaled steroids and showing significant reversibility with beta2-agonists, laba is superior to ltra in reducing oral steroid treated exacerbations. differences favouring laba in lung function, functional status and quality of life scores are generally modest. there is some evidence of increased risk of saes with laba. the findings support the use of a single inhaler for the delivery of laba and inhaled corticosteroids. we are unable to draw conclusions about which treatment is better as add-on therapy for children.
no conclusions can be made about the effectiveness of a cholesterol-lowering diet, or any of the other dietary interventions suggested for familial hypercholesterolaemia, due to the lack of adequate data. large, parallel, randomised controlled trials are needed to investigate the effectiveness of a cholesterol-lowering diet and the addition of omega-3 fatty acids, plant sterols or stanols, soya protein to a cholesterol-lowering diet.
only one randomised clinical trial has examined bicyclol for patients with chronic hepatitis c. this small, short-term trial found no evidence to support or refute its use. large, randomised, double-blind clinical trials with long-term follow-up are needed to examine the possible benefits and harms associated with bicyclol. bicyclol can only be recommended for use in randomised trials.
overall, there is no evidence that ginkgo biloba has a clinically significant benefit for patients with peripheral arterial disease.
due to the limited number of studies available comparing various interface types, he optimum form of cpap delivery interface remains unclear. the results of our review suggest that nasal pillows or the oracle oral mask may be useful alternatives when a patient is unable to tolerate conventional nasal masks. the face mask can not be recommended as a first line interface, but may be considered if nasal obstruction or dryness limits the use of a nasal mask. further randomised studies comparing the different forms of cpap delivery interface now available for the treatment of osa, in larger groups of patients and for longer durations, are required.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend any one particular protocol for endometrial preparation over another with regard to pregnancy rates after embryo transfers. these were either frozen embryos or embryos derived from donor oocytes. however, there is evidence of a lower pregnancy rate and a higher cycle cancellation rate when the progesterone supplementation is commenced prior to oocyte retrieval in oocyte donation cycles. adequately powered studies are needed to evaluate each treatment more accurately.
there is moderate quality evidence that mobile phone text message reminders are more effective than no reminders, and low quality evidence that text message reminders with postal reminders are more effective than postal reminders alone. further, according to the moderate quality evidence we found, mobile phone text message reminders are as effective as phone call reminders. overall, there is limited evidence on the effects of mobile phone text message reminders for appointment attendance, and further high-quality research is required to draw more robust conclusions.
there is insufficient evidence to suggest that oral agents are inferior or superior to injectable agents in the treatment of unexplained subfertility. information on harms is sketchy, and remains compatible with large differences in either direction. much larger trials than have previously been undertaken are required to provide information on relative harms as well as benefits.
in most patients with pneumonia, corticosteroids are generally beneficial for accelerating the time to resolution of symptoms. however, evidence from the included studies was not strong enough to make any recommendations.
buprenorphine is more effective than clonidine or lofexidine for the management of opioid withdrawal. buprenorphine may offer some advantages over methadone, at least in inpatient settings, in terms of quicker resolution of withdrawal symptoms and possibly slightly higher rates of completion of withdrawal.
concomitant chemoradiation appears to improve overall survival and progression-free survival in locally advanced cervical cancer. it also appears to reduce local and distant recurrence suggesting concomitant chemotherapy may afford radiosensitisation and systemic cytotoxic effects. some acute toxicity is increased, but the long-term side effects are still not clear.
with only a few studies meeting inclusion criteria, and with limited useable data in these studies, it is not possible to arrive at definitive conclusions. the preliminary pattern of evidence suggests that people with early episode schizophrenia treated with typical antipsychotic medications are less likely to leave the study early, but more likely to experience medication-related side effects. data are too sparse to assess the effects of antipsychotic medication on outcomes in early episode schizophrenia.
only 63% of results from abstracts describing randomized or controlled clinical trials are published in full. 'positive' results were more frequently published than not 'positive' results.
there is good evidence from rcts that statins given in late life to individuals at risk of vascular disease have no effect in preventing ad or dementia. biologically it seems feasible that statins could prevent dementia due to their role in cholesterol reduction and initial evidence from observational studies was very promising. indication bias may have been a factor in these studies however and the evidence from subsequent rcts has been negative.
there is currently weak evidence that oral nefopam, topical capsaicin and oromucosal cannabis are all superior to placebo in reducing pain in patients with ra. however, each agent is associated with a significant side effect profile. the confidence in our estimates is not strong given the difficulties with blinding, the small numbers of participants evaluated and the lack of adverse event data. in some patients, however, even a small degree of pain relief may be considered worthwhile. until further research is available, given the relatively mild nature of the adverse events, capsaicin could be considered as an add-on therapy for patients with persistent local pain and inadequate response or intolerance to other treatments. oral nefopam and oromucosal cannabis have more significant side effect profiles however and the potential harms seem to outweigh any modest benefit achieved.
psychological therapy based on cbt principles is effective in reducing anxiety symptoms for short-term treatment of gad. the body of evidence comparing cbt with other psychological therapies is small and heterogeneous, which precludes drawing conclusions about which psychological therapy is more effective. further studies examining non-cbt models are required to inform health care policy on the most appropriate forms of psychological therapy in treating gad.
the current evidence does not support acupuncture for treating epilepsy.
topical imidazole appears to be more effective than nystatin for treating symptomatic vaginal candidiasis in pregnancy. treatments for seven days may be necessary in pregnancy rather than the shorter courses more commonly used in non-pregnant women. [note: the seven citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the combination of ibuprofen 400mg + oxycodone 5mg provided analgesia for longer than oxycodone alone, but not ibuprofen alone (at the same dose). there was also a smaller chance of needing additional analgesia over about eight hours, and with no greater chance of experiencing an adverse event.
we found no new studies since the last version of this review. aspirin 1000 mg is an effective treatment for acute migraine headaches, similar to sumatriptan 50 mg or 100 mg. addition of metoclopramide 10 mg improves relief of nausea and vomiting. adverse events were mainly mild and transient, and were slightly more common with aspirin than placebo, but less common than with sumatriptan 100 mg.
the findings of this review suggest that psychological treatments derived from cognitive behavioural models are an effective treatment for adult patients with obsessive compulsive disorder. larger high quality randomised controlled trials involving longer follow up periods are needed, to further test cognitive behavioural treatments, and other psychological approaches, in comparison to each other and control conditions. future trials should examine the predictors of response to each treatment, and also conduct cost-effectiveness evaluations.
based on the results of the two included studies, intratympanic gentamicin seems to be an effective treatment for vertigo complaints in ménière's disease, but carries a risk of hearing loss.
despite the limited information about key aspects of mass media interventions and the poor quality of the available primary research there is evidence that these channels of communication may have an important role in influencing the use of health care interventions. although the findings of this review may be affected by publication bias, those engaged in promoting better uptake of research information in clinical practice should consider mass media as one of the tools that may encourage the use of effective services and discourage those of unproven effectiveness.
although data were available from only one eligible trial the data were sufficiently robust to make recommendations for practice. disposable insert pads are typically more effective than the other designs considered. however, because they are the most expensive, providing choice of designs (or combinations of designs for different circumstances) is likely to be cost-effective.
we found few studies, and all were in the usa. although the results are potentially promising, high quality trials of palliative care service delivery interventions which assess outcomes for residents are needed, particularly outside the usa. these should focus on measuring standard outcomes, assessing cost-effectiveness, and reducing bias.
caffeine may be an effective intervention for improving performance in shift workers however, there are no trials from which we can assess its effect on injuries. the results largely originate from studies involving young participants under simulated conditions, and the extent to which the findings are generalisable to older workers and real world shift work is unclear. based on the current evidence, there is no reason for healthy individuals who already use caffeine within recommended levels to improve their alertness to stop doing so. the assessment of the relative effects of caffeine to other potential countermeasures should be a focus of future research.
both nsaids and opioids can provide effective analgesia in acute renal colic. opioids are associated with a higher incidence of adverse events, particularly vomiting. given the high rate of vomiting associated with the use of opioids, particularly pethidine, and the greater likelihood of requiring further analgesia, we recommend that if an opioid is to be used it should not be pethidine.
the benefits of educational programs to participants and their newborns remain unclear. education on sleep enhancement appears to increase infant sleep and education about infant behaviour potentially enhances mothers' knowledge; however more and larger, well-designed studies are needed to confirm this.
topical quinolone antibiotics can clear aural discharge better than systemic antibiotics; topical non-quinolone antibiotic (without steroids) or antiseptic results are less clear. evidence regarding safety was weak. further studies should clarify topical non-quinolones and antiseptic effectiveness, assess longer-term outcomes (for resolution, healing, hearing, or complications), and include further safety assessments, particularly to clarify the risks of ototoxicity and whether there may be fewer adverse events with topical quinolones than other topical or systemic treatments.
in several randomized controlled trials, the cjp has been shown to be superior to the sca in bowel function outcomes in patients with rectal cancer for at least 18 months after gastrointestinal continuity is re-established. the tc and ste anastomoses have been shown to have similar bowel function outcomes when compared to the cjp in small randomized controlled trials; further study is necessary to determine the role of these alternative coloanal anastomotic strategies.
the research evidence is of insufficient quality to reach any conclusions regarding the beneficial and adverse effects of routine scaling and polishing for periodontal health and regarding the effects of providing this intervention at different time intervals. high quality clinical trials are required to address the basic questions posed in this review.
although tricyclics and desmopressin are effective in reducing the number of wet nights while taking the drugs, most children relapse after stopping active treatment. in contrast, only half the children relapse after alarm treatment. parents should be warned of the potentially serious adverse effects of tricyclic overdose when choosing treatment. further research is needed into comparisons between drug and behavioural or complementary treatments, and should include relapse rates after treatment is finished.
there is insufficient evidence to establish the safety or effectiveness of hfnc as a form of respiratory support in preterm infants. when used following extubation, hfnc may be associated with a higher rate of reintubation than nasal cpap. further adequately powered randomised controlled trials should be undertaken in preterm infants comparing hfnc with nasal cpap and with other means of respiratory support; or of support following extubation. these trials should measure clinically important outcomes.
there is no evidence of clinical benefit of clomiphene citrate for unexplained fertility. when making this treatment choice, potential side effects should be discussed. these include the increased risk of multiple pregnancy and the concern that use for more that 12 cycles has been associated with a three-fold increase in risk of ovarian cancer.
these results indicate that ligation and valvuloplasty may have produced a moderate and sustained improvement for seven to ten years after surgery in patients with mild to moderate dvi caused by primary valvular incompetence. however, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the treatment to this subgroup of patients, as the trials were small, used different methods of valvuloplasty and different methods of assessment.
bicycle helmet legislation appears to be effective in increasing helmet use and decreasing head injury rates in the populations for which it is implemented. however, there are very few high quality evaluative studies that measure these outcomes, and none that reported data on possible declines in bicycle use.
tirilazad mesylate increased the combined end-point of 'death or disability' by about one-fifth, but did not alter case fatality, when given to patients with acute ischaemic stroke. although further trials of tirilazad are now not warranted, analysis of individual patient data from the trials may help elucidate why tirilazad appears to worsen outcome in acute ischaemic stroke.
aspirin appears to reduce stroke and major vascular events in patients with non-valvular af similar to its effect in other high-risk patients (i.e. by about 25%). for primary prevention among af patients with an average stroke rate of 4% per year, about 10 strokes would likely be prevented yearly for every 1000 af patients given aspirin.
there is insufficient evidence to draw conclusions on the use of aci for treating full thickness articular cartilage defects in the knee. further good quality randomised controlled trials with long-term functional outcomes are required.
in view of the paucity of high level evidence for the effectiveness of interventions for the management of tmj oa, small parallel group rcts which include participants with a clear diagnosis of tmj oa should be encouraged and especially studies evaluating some of the possible surgical interventions.
there are very few studies to date examining provision of, or advice to increase the consumption of, fruit and vegetables in the absence of additional dietary interventions or other lifestyle interventions for the primary prevention of cvd. the limited evidence suggests advice to increase fruit and vegetables as a single intervention has favourable effects on cvd risk factors but more trials are needed to confirm this.
oral or intramuscular corticosteroids, in addition to antibiotics, increase the likelihood of both resolution and improvement of pain in participants with sore throat. further trials assessing corticosteroids in the absence of antibiotics and in children are warranted.
the review demonstrates that there is currently insufficient high-quality evidence from randomised controlled trials or quasi-randomised controlled trials to provide conclusive results about the effectiveness of any particular type of oral-motor therapy for children with neurological impairment. there is an urgent need for larger-scale (appropriately statistically powered), randomised trials to evaluate the efficacy of interventions for oropharyngeal dysphagia.
isopropyl alcohol was more effective than saline placebo for reducing postoperative nausea and vomiting but less effective than standard anti-emetic drugs. there is currently no reliable evidence for the use of peppermint oil.
low pressure pneumoperitoneum appears effective in decreasing pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. the safety of low pressure pneumoperitoneum has to be established.
there is currently not enough evidence to support the routine use of mannitol in acute stroke patients. further trials are needed to confirm or refute whether mannitol is beneficial in acute stroke.
there is insufficient evidence at present on which to recommend a policy of using room air over 100% oxygen, or vice versa, for newborn resuscitation. a reduction in mortality has been seen in infants resuscitated with room air, and no evidence of harm has been demonstrated. however, the small number of identified studies and their methodologic limitations dictate caution in interpreting and applying these results. we note the use of back-up 100% oxygen in more than a quarter of infants randomised to room air. therefore, on the basis of currently available evidence, if one chooses room air as the initial gas for resuscitation, supplementary oxygen should continue to be made available.
the evidence provided by the four included rcts shows that enemas do not have a significant beneficial effect on infection rates such as perineal wound infection or other neonatal infections and women's satisfaction. these findings speak against the routine use of enemas during labour, therefore, such practice should be discouraged.
included trials were too small and had too high a risk of bias to be confident about the possible benefits of nasal saline irrigation in acute urtis. future trials should involve much larger numbers of participants and be rigorously designed and controlled.
there is currently no evidence to suggest the use of zinc supplementation in the prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus. future trials will have to standardise outcomes measures such as incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus, decrease of the insulin resistance, quality of life, diabetic complications, all-cause mortality and costs.
we found inconclusive evidence that interventions with spiritual or religious components for adults in the terminal phase of a disease may or may not enhance well-being. such interventions are under-evaluated. all five studies identified were undertaken in the same country, and in the multi-disciplinary palliative care interventions it is unclear if all participants received support from a chaplain or a spiritual counsellor. moreover, it is unclear in all the studies whether the participants in the comparative groups received spiritual or religious support, or both, as part of routine care or from elsewhere. the paucity of quality research indicates a need for more rigorous studies.
current evidence does not demonstrate any benefits or adverse effects from the use of respite care for people with dementia or their caregivers. these results should be treated with caution, however, as they may reflect the lack of high quality research in this area rather than an actual lack of benefit. given the frequency with which respite care is advocated and provided, well-designed trials in this area are needed.
in view of the methodological deficiencies, limited number of individual studies and differences in outcome measure, we have found no reliable evidence to support the use of felbamate as an add-on therapy in patients with refractory partial-onset epilepsy. a large scale, randomized controlled trial conducted over a greater period of time is required to inform clinical practice.
pde5i and zinc are promising interventions for treating sexual dysfunction in men with ckd. evidence supporting their routine use in ckd patients is limited. there is an unmet need for studying interventions for both male and female sexual dysfunction in ckd, considering the significant disease burden.
there was no evidence to suggest a benefit of using coasting to prevent ohss compared with no coasting or other interventions.
reducing protein intake does not appear to have significant impact in delaying the progression to eskd in children.
while each of the programmes in this review showed some benefit to children with epilepsy their impacts were extremely variable. no programme showed benefits across the full range of outcomes. no study appears to have demonstrated any detrimental effects but the evidence in favour of any single programme is insufficient to make it possible to recommend one programme rather than another. more trials, carried out by independent research teams, are needed.
a comprehensive review of current evidence found some evidence that preoperative skin preparation with 0.5% chlorhexidine in methylated spirits was associated with lower rates of ssis following clean surgery than alcohol-based povidone iodine paint. however this single study was poorly reported. practitioners may therefore elect to consider other characteristics such as costs and potential side effects when choosing between alternatives. the design of future trials should be driven by the questions of high priority to decision makers. it may be that investment in at least one large trial (in terms of participants) is warranted in order to add definitive and hopefully conclusive data to the current evidence base. ideally any future trial would evaluate the iodine-containing and chlorhexidine-containing solutions relevant to current practice as well as the type of solution used (alcohol vs. aqueous).
from the limited evidence available, the ponseti technique may produce better short-term outcomes compared to the kite technique. an accelerated ponseti technique may be as effective as a standard technique. we could draw no conclusions from other included trials because of the limited use of validated outcome measures and lack of available raw data. future randomised controlled trials should address these issues.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend routine use of opioids in mechanically ventilated newborns. opioids should be used selectively, when indicated by clinical judgment and evaluation of pain indicators. if sedation is required, morphine is safer than midazolam. further research is needed.
results from the only trial available would suggest that ivbt is effective at improving the patency of femoropopliteal arteries undergoing pta in the short-term, particularly in non-diabetics with long occlusions (>10cm).
there is no conclusive evidence about the superiority of any support surface for the treatment of existing pressure ulcers. methodological issues included variations in outcomes measured, sample sizes and comparison groups. many studies had small sample sizes and often there was inadequate description of the intervention, standard care and co-interventions. individual study results were often inadequately reported, with failure to report variance data common, thus hindering the calculation of mean differences. some studies did not report p values when reporting on differences in outcomes. in addition, the age of some trials (some being 20 years old), means that other technologies may have superseded those investigated. further and rigorous studies are required to address these concerns and to improve the evidence base before firm conclusions can be drawn about the most effective support surfaces to treat pressure ulcers.
there is some evidence to suggest that intra-arterial rt-pa is more effective than intra-arterial streptokinase or intravenous rt-pa in improving vessel patency in people with peripheral arterial occlusion. there was no evidence that rt-pa was more effective than urokinase for patients with peripheral arterial occlusion and some evidence that initial lysis may be more rapid with rt-pa, depending on the regime. incidences of haemorrhagic complications were not statistically significantly greater with rt-pa than with other regimes. however, all of the findings come from small studies and a general paucity of results means that it is not possible to draw clear conclusions.
the short-term benefit of ia corticosteroids in treatment of knee oa is well established, and few side effects have been reported. longer term benefits have not been confirmed based on the revman analysis. the response to ha products appears more durable. in this review, some discrepancies were observed between the revman 4.2 analysis and the original publication. these are likely the result of using secondary rather than primary data and the statistical methods available in revman 4.2. future trials should have standardised outcome measures and assessment times, run longer, investigate different patient subgroups, and clinical predictors of response (those associated with inflammation and structural damage).
there was no evidence that early refeeding increases the risk of unscheduled intravenous fluid use, episodes of vomiting, and development of persistent diarrhoea. no conclusion could be made regarding the duration of diarrhoea.
there is moderate quality evidence that post-treatment exercise programmes can prevent recurrences of back pain but conflicting evidence was found for treatment exercise. studies into the validity of measurement of recurrences and the effectiveness of post-treatment exercise are needed.
shengmai may be beneficial in treating heart failure, especially in terms of improving the nyha functional classification with shengmai plus usual treatment. however, the evidence for its effects on mortality and hospitalisation are not available yet. therefore more studies, of higher quality and long-term follow-up, are needed to provide more evidence for the future use of shengmai.
particular considerations that influence the choice of anaesthesia for this procedure such as availability, effectiveness, safety, side effects, practitioner's choice, costs and woman's preferences of each technique should continue to be used until more evidence supporting the use of one technique or another.
there is some evidence that multi-component interventions for alcohol misuse prevention in young people can be effective. however, there is little evidence that interventions with multiple components are more effective than interventions with single components.
antibiotics reduce the duration of shigella dysentery. regularly updated local or regional antibiotic sensitivity patterns to different species and strains of shigella are required to guide empiric therapy. more trials adhering to standard guidelines are required to evaluate the role of antibiotics in the treatment of severe forms of shigella dysentery and in groups who are at high risk of complications.
the effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation remains unconfirmed. the results suggest there may be a short-term effect on attentional abilities, but future studies need to assess the persisting effects and measure attentional skills in daily life. trials also need to have higher methodological quality and better reporting.
despite heterogeneity in probiotic strain, dose, and duration, as well as in study quality, the overall evidence suggests a protective effect of probiotics in preventing aad. using 11 criteria to evaluate the credibility of the subgroup analysis on probiotic dose, the results indicate that the subgroup effect based on dose (≥5 billion cfu/day) was credible. based on high-dose probiotics, the number needed to treat (nnt) to prevent one case of diarrhea is seven (nnt 7; 95% ci 6 to 10). however, a grade analysis indicated that the overall quality of the evidence for the primary endpoint (incidence of diarrhea) was low due to issues with risk of bias (due to high loss to follow-up) and imprecision (sparse data, 225 events). the benefit for high dose probiotics (lactobacillus rhamnosus or saccharomyces boulardii) needs to be confirmed by a large well-designed randomized trial. more refined trials are also needed that test strain specific probiotics and evaluate the efficacy (e.g. incidence and duration of diarrhea) and safety of probiotics with limited losses to follow-up. it is premature to draw conclusions about the efficacy and safety of other probiotic agents for pediatric aad. future trials would benefit from a standard and valid outcomes to measure aad.
the small trial identified was underpowered to detect the outcome measures of interest. consequently, there are insufficient data available to support a practice of elective delivery from 37 weeks' gestation for women with an otherwise uncomplicated twin pregnancy at term.
the positive evidence in favour of chinese herbal medicines for the treatment of igt or ifg is constrained by the following factors: lack of trials that tested the same herbal medicine, lack of details on co-interventions, unclear methods of randomisation, poor reporting and other risks of bias.
surgical treatment should be considered for all women with hydrosalpinges prior to ivf treatment. previous evidence supported only unilateral salpingectomy for a unilateral hydrosalpinx (bilateral salpingectomy for bilateral hydrosalpinges). this review now provides evidence that laparoscopic tubal occlusion is an alternative to laparoscopic salpingectomy in improving ivf pregnancy rates in women with hydrosalpinges. further research is required to assess the value of aspiration of hydrosalpinges prior to or during ivf procedures and also the value of tubal restorative surgery as an alternative (or as a preliminary) to ivf.
there is little available high quality information from randomised controlled trials to inform the optimal procedural technique when performing fetal intrauterine fetal blood transfusions for women with an anaemic fetus due to red cell alloimmunisation. further research evaluating the benefits and harms associated with different techniques is required.
our analysis suggests, if at all only a minor clinical benefit of treatment with long-acting insulin analogues for patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 treated with "basal" insulin regarding symptomatic nocturnal hypoglycaemic events. until long-term efficacy and safety data are available, we suggest a cautious approach to therapy with insulin glargine or detemir.
the results of our review do not support the routine use of antibiotics for children up to 18 years with otitis media with effusion. the largest effects of antibiotics were seen in children treated continuously for four weeks and three months. even when clear and relevant benefits of antibiotics have been demonstrated, these must be balanced against the potential adverse effects when making treatment decisions. immediate adverse effects of antibiotics are common and the emergence of bacterial resistance has been causally linked to the widespread use of antibiotics for common conditions such as otitis media.
available evidence indicates that high levels of peep, as compared with low levels, did not reduce mortality before hospital discharge. the data also show that high levels of peep produced no significant difference in the risk of barotrauma, but rather improved participants' oxygenation to the first, third, and seventh days. this review indicates that the included studies were characterized by clinical heterogeneity.
lllt could be considered for short-term treatment for relief of pain and morning stiffness for ra patients, particularly since it has few side-effects. clinicians and researchers should consistently report the characteristics of the lllt device and the application techniques used. new trials on lllt should make use of standardized, validated outcomes. despite some positive findings, this meta-analysis lacked data on how lllt effectiveness is affected by four important factors: wavelength, treatment duration of lllt, dosage and site of application over nerves instead of joints. there is clearly a need to investigate the effects of these factors on lllt effectiveness for ra in randomized controlled clinical trials.
tissue adhesives are an acceptable alternative to standard wound closure for repairing simple traumatic lacerations. they offer the benefit of decreased procedure time and less pain, when compared to standard wound closure. a small but statistically significant increased rate of dehiscence with tissue adhesives is observed.
the evidence base for the effects of herbal treatments is hampered by the variety of treatments assessed, poor reporting quality of the studies and lack of available data. the data that are available from the studies provide only a small insight into the long-term efficacy and harm profiles of these treatments. the absence of common endpoint measurements limits the validity of our findings further. positive findings in this review warrant additional well-designed trials in this area.
it is likely that self-management education is associated with a reduction in hospital admissions with no indications for detrimental effects in other outcome parameters. this would in itself already be enough reason for recommending self-management education in copd. however, because of heterogeneity in interventions, study populations, follow-up time, and outcome measures, data are still insufficient to formulate clear recommendations regarding the form and contents of self-management education programmes in copd. there is an evident need for more large rcts with a long-term follow-up, before more conclusions can be drawn.
the findings of this systematic review suggest that hfo was a promising treatment for ali and ards prior to the uptake of current lung protective ventilation strategies. these findings may not be applicable with current conventional care, pending the results of large multi-centre trials currently underway.
an anthracycline infusion duration of six hours or longer reduces the risk of clinical heart failure and it seems to reduce the risk of subclinical cardiac damage. since there is only a small amount of data for children and data obtained in adults cannot be extrapolated to children, different anthracycline infusion durations should be evaluated further in children. no significant difference in the occurrence of clinical heart failure was identified in patients treated with a doxorubicin peak dose of less than 60 mg/m2 or 60 mg/m2 or more. for the other identified peak doses only one rct was available, so no definitive conclusions can be made about the occurrence of cardiotoxicity. more high quality research is needed, both in children and adults and in leukaemias and solid tumours.
overall, this review found there is either no or insufficient evidence from randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials to determine whether surgery is, and which surgical interventions are, the most appropriate for the management of different types of distal humerus fractures. well designed and reported large and multi-centre randomised controlled trials testing current interventions, such as pre-contoured and locking plating systems, are needed.
overall this review reports little significant behavioural changes with reductions in rates of drug consumption following an intervention. moreover, with the evidence currently available, there are no data supporting a single treatment approach that is able to comprise the multidimensional facets of addiction patterns and to significantly yield better outcomes to resolve the chronic, relapsing nature of addiction, with all its correlates and consequences.
this review suggests that more-intense chemotherapy regimens may improve both os and pfs for women with advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer. however, owing to inconsistencies between cytotoxic drug combinations that have been assessed in randomised trials to date, the optimum regimen has still to be defined. future trials should aim to include measures of quality of life (qol) and symptom control in addition to survival and progression outcomes.
there is insufficient, consistent evidence to either support or refute the use of arthrocentesis and lavage for treating patients with temporomandibular joint disorders. further high quality rcts of arthrocentesis need to be conducted before firm conclusions with regard to its effectiveness can be drawn.
the diversity of psychological interventions identified indicates the many ways in which they can potentially help people with ms. no definite conclusions can be made from this review. however there is reasonable evidence that cognitive behavioural approaches are beneficial in the treatment of depression, and in helping people adjust to, and cope with, having ms.
overall, the findings of this review demonstrated insufficient evidence to support a role for non-opioid drugs on their own to manage pain during labour.
albendazole may be of similar effectiveness to metronidazole, may have fewer side effects, and has the advantage of a simplified regimen. large, high quality trials, assessing clinical outcomes (such as diarrhoea) will help assess further alternatives.
deferasirox appears to be as effective as deferoxamine. however, only limited evidence is available assessing the efficacy regarding patient-important outcomes. the short-term safety of deferasirox seems to be acceptable, however, follow-up was too short to exclude long-term side effects and thus treatment with deferasirox cannot be judged completely safe. future studies should assess long-term outcomes for safety and efficacy, and also evaluate rarer adverse effects.
prophylactic use of ibuprofen decreased the incidence of pda, decreased the need for rescue treatment with cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors and decreased the need for surgical closure. in the control group, the pda closed spontaneously by day three in 58% of the neonates. prophylactic treatment exposes many infants to a drug that has concerning renal and gastrointestinal side effects without conferring any important short-term benefits and is not recommended. until long-term follow-up results are published from the trials included in this updated review, no further trials of prophylactic ibuprofen are recommended.
skills based programs appear to be effective in deterring early-stage drug use. the replication of results with well designed, long term randomised trials, and the evaluation of single components of intervention (peer, parents, booster sessions) are the priorities for research. all new studies should control for cluster effect.
for women with pre-eclampsia, postnatal furosemide may decrease the need for postnatal antihypertensive therapy in hospital, but more data are needed on substantive outcomes before this practice can be recommended. there are no reliable data to guide management of women who are hypertensive postpartum. any antihypertensive agent used should be based on a clinician's familiarity with the drug. future studies should include data on postpartum analgesics, severe maternal hypertension, breastfeeding, hospital length of stay, and maternal satisfaction with care.
results from three small studies, with low methodological quality, indicated eswl is less effective for lower pole kidney stones than pcnl but not significantly different from rirs. hospital stay and duration of treatment was less with eswl. more rcts are required to investigate the effectiveness and complications of eswl for kidney stones compared to pcnl or rirs.
psychosocial smoking cessation interventions are effective in promoting abstinence at 1 year, provided they are of sufficient duration. further studies, with longer follow-up, should compare different psychosocial intervention strategies, or the addition of a psychosocial intervention strategy to pharmacological therapy (e.g. nicotine replacement therapy) compared with pharmacological treatment alone.
treatment with ht in post-menopausal women for either primary or secondary prevention of cvd events is not effective, and causes an increase in the risk of stroke, and venous thromboembolic events. ht should therefore only be considered for women seeking relief from menopausal symptoms. short-term ht treatment should be at the lowest effective dose, and used with caution in women with predisposing risk factors for cvd events.
the review authors cannot confirm or refute previous literature on the use of thalidomide for patients with advanced cancer who have cachexia and there is inadequate evidence to recommend it for clinical practice. additional, well conducted, large rcts are needed to test thalidomide both singularly and in combination with other treatment modalities to ascertain its true benefit, if any, for this population. furthermore, one study (out of the three reviewed) highlighted that thalidomide was poorly tolerated and its use needs to be explored further in light of the frailty of this population.
evidence from this review suggests that switching antipsychotic medication to one with lesser potential for causing weight gain or metabolic problems could be an effective way to manage these side effects, but the data were weak due to the limited number of trials in this area and small sample sizes. poor reporting of data also hindered using some trials and outcomes. there was no difference in mental state, global state and other treatment related adverse events between switching to another medication and continuing on the previous one. when the three switching strategies were compared none of them had an advantage over the others in their effects on the primary outcomes considered in this review. better designed trials with adequate power would provide more convincing evidence for using medication switching as an intervention strategy. note: the 167 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
plastic wraps or bags, plastic caps, ssc and transwarmer mattresses all keep preterm infants warmer leading to higher temperatures on admission to neonatal units and less hypothermia. however, the small numbers of infants and studies and the absence of long-term follow-up mean that firm recommendations for clinical practice cannot be given.
supported employment is more effective than pre-vocational training in helping severely mentally ill people to obtain competitive employment. there is no clear evidence that pre-vocational training is effective.
there was no significant difference between fp and extrafine hfa-bdp on fev1 or peak flow at a dose ratio of 1:1. however, the number of studies and width of the confidence intervals in the analyses do not exclude a clinically meaningful difference between these two drugs. difficulty in the successful manipulation of the devices studied may be a barrier to the widespread use of mdis. only two small paediatric studies were included in the review, so extrapolation of the findings of this review to children is limited. further longer term studies in adults and children with moderate and severe asthma are required.
there was insufficient evidence to show effectiveness of any of the interventions, including breastfeeding education, pharmacological treatments and alternative therapies, regarding the occurrence of mastitis or breastfeeding exclusivity and duration. while studies reported the incidence of mastitis, they all used different interventions. caution needs to be applied when considering the findings of this review as the conclusion is based on studies, often with small sample sizes. an urgent need for further adequately powered research is needed into this area to conclusively determine the effectiveness of these interventions.
grommets have a significant role in maintaining a 'disease-free' state in the first six months after insertion. further research is required to investigate the effect beyond six months. clinicians should consider the possible adverse effects of grommet insertion before surgery is undertaken.
based on current limited evidence, chest physiotherapy might not be recommended as routine additional treatment for pneumonia in adults.
the effects of physical exercise training interventions for childhood cancer participants are not yet convincing due to small numbers of participants and insufficient study methodology. despite that, first results show a trend towards an improved physical fitness in the intervention group compared to the control group. changes in physical fitness were seen by improved body composition, flexibility, and cardiorespiratory fitness. however, the evidence is limited and these positive effects were not found for the other assessed outcomes, such as muscle strength/endurance, the level of daily activity, health-related quality of life, and fatigue. there is a need for more studies with comparable aims and interventions, using higher numbers of participants and for studies with another childhood cancer population than all only.
overall, the review demonstrated that the limited evidence of benefit of stretching, passive exercises and mobilization, when applied to the hemiplegic upper limb following stroke, merits further research.
limited paediatric data are available comparing antifungal agents in children with proven, probable or suspected invasive fungal infection. no differences in mortality or treatment efficacy were observed when antifungal agents were compared. children are less likely to develop nephrotoxicity with a lipid preparation of amphotericin b compared with conventional amphotericin b. further comparative paediatric antifungal drug trials and epidemiological and pharmacological studies are required highlighting the differences between neonates, children and adults with invasive fungal infections.
with an overall high grade of evidence, at the fda-approved dose, golimumab is significantly more efficacious than placebo in treatment of patients with active ra , when used in combination with methotrexate. the short-term safety profile, based on short-term rcts, is reasonable with no differences in total adverse events, serious infections, cancer, tuberculosis or deaths. long-term surveillance studies are needed for safety assessment.
the small number of participants and the short follow-up period impede definitive conclusions on comparative effects.
results from the small number of available rcts suggest that sris and cbt may be useful in treating patients with bdd. the findings of these studies need to be replicated. in addition, future controlled studies in other samples, such as adolescents, and using other selective sris, as well as a range of psychological therapy approaches and modalities (alone and in combination), are essential in supplementing the sparse data currently available.
prophylactic antibiotic use in patients with cirrhosis and upper gastrointestinal bleeding significantly reduced bacterial infections, and seems to have reduced all-cause mortality, bacterial infection mortality, rebleeding events, and hospitalisation length. these benefits were observed independently of the type of antibiotic used; thus, no specific antibiotic can be preferred. therefore, antibiotic selection should be made considering local conditions such as bacterial resistance profile and treatment cost.
inositol supplementation results in statistically significant and clinically important reductions in important short-term adverse neonatal outcomes. a multicenter randomized controlled trial of appropriate size is justified to confirm these findings.
tcu380a or tcu380s appear to be more effective than other iuds. no iud showed consistently lower removal rates for bleeding and pain in comparison to other iuds. there is no evidence that any particular framed copper device is better suited to women who have not had children.
there is no evidence of effect of ssris in children and emerging evidence of harm. there is limited evidence of the effectiveness of ssris in adults from small studies in which risk of bias is unclear.
we found some limited evidence of effects on practice attributable to changes in record systems. it is clear from the literature that it is possible to set up the randomised trials or other quasi-experimental designs needed to produce evidence for practice. qualitative nursing research to explore the relationship between practice and information use could be used as a precursor to the design and testing of nursing information systems.
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether organisational travel plans are effective for improving health or changing travel mode. organisational travel plans should be considered as complex health promotion interventions, with considerable potential to influence community health outcomes depending on the environmental context in which they are introduced. given the current lack of evidence, organisational travel plans should be implemented in the context of robustly-designed research studies, such as well-designed cluster randomised trials.
the clinical data were limited to patients with histologic evidence of severe fibrosis who were retreated with pegylated interferon. in this scenario, retreatment with interferon did not appear to provide significant clinical benefit and, when only the trials at low risk of bias were considered, retreatment for several years may even have increased all-cause mortality. such treatment also produced adverse events. on the other hand, the treatment did result in improvement in some surrogate outcomes, namely sustained viral responses and histologic evidence of inflammation. interferon monotherapy retreatment cannot be recommended for these patients. no clinical data are available for patients with less severe fibrosis. the sustained viral response cannot be used as a surrogate marker for hepatitis c treatment in this clinical setting with low sustained viral response rates and needs to be validated in others in which higher sustained viral response rates are reported.
the optimal management of igan remains uncertain. the rcts identified were small, of sub-optimal methodological quality and tended to only report favorable and surrogate outcomes without a thorough reporting of treatment harms. all outcomes favor the use of immunosuppressive interventions, with steroids appearing to be the most promising. further study, in the form of rcts, is necessary to ascertain which patients would benefit from these interventions, whether they are the ones with early signs of renal dysfunction or those with more advanced renal impairment.
as a result of the limited number of included studies, the small sample sizes and the high risk of bias, we are unable to draw any conclusions regarding the effectiveness of meditation therapy for adhd. the adverse effects of meditation have not been reported. more trials are needed.
pac is a diagnostic and haemodynamic monitoring tool but not a therapeutic intervention. our review concluded that use of a pac did not alter the mortality, general icu or hospital los, or cost for adult patients in intensive care. the quality of evidence was high for mortality and los but low for cost analysis. efficacy studies are needed to determine if there are optimal pac-guided management protocols, which when applied to specific patient groups in icus could result in benefits such as shock reversal, improved organ function and less vasopressor use. newer, less-invasive haemodynamic monitoring tools need to be validated against pac prior to clinical use in critically ill patients.
there is no evidence of benefit in the use of ovulation suppression in subfertile women with endometriosis who wish to conceive.
supplementing very preterm infants with selenium is associated with benefit in terms of a reduction in one or more episodes of sepsis. supplementation was not associated with improved survival, a reduction in neonatal chronic lung disease or retinopathy of prematurity. supplemental doses of selenium for infants on parenteral nutrition higher than those currently recommended may be beneficial. the data are dominated by one large trial from a country with low selenium concentrations and may not be readily translated to other populations.
there is insufficient evidence to reach conclusions about the effectiveness of interventions for patients with eye movement disorders after stroke. high quality research in the form of well-designed randomised trials are urgently required.
the authors consider that the body of evidence summarised in this review is insufficient to allow any firm conclusion to be drawn about the use of antiepileptic medication in the treatment of aggression and associated impulsivity. four antiepileptics (valproate/divalproex, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine and phenytoin) were effective, compared to placebo, in reducing aggression in at least one study, although for three drugs (valproate, carbamazepine and phenytoin) at least one other study showed no statistically significant difference between treatment and control conditions. side effects were more commonly noted for the intervention group although adverse effects were not well reported. absence of information does not necessarily mean that the treatment is safe, nor that the potential gains from the medication necessarily balance the risk of an adverse event occurring. further research is needed.
subjects in these trials were similar to those seen in earlier anti dementia ad trials, consisting primarily of mildly to moderately impaired outpatients. galantamine's effect on more severely impaired subjects has not yet been assessed.nevertheless, this review shows consistent positive effects for galantamine for trials of three to six months' duration. although there was not a statistically significant dose-response effect, doses above 8 mg/d were, for the most part, consistently statistically significant. galantamine's safety profile in ad is similar to that of other cholinesterase inhibitors with respect to cholinergically mediated gastrointestinal symptoms. it appears that doses of 16 mg/d were best tolerated in the single trial where medication was titrated over a four week period, and because this dose showed statistically indistinguishable efficacy with higher doses, it is probably most preferable initially. longer term use of galantamine has not been assessed in a controlled fashion.galantamine use in mci is not recommended due to its association with an excess death rate.
research in this field is limited. personal assistance is expensive and difficult to organise, especially in places that do not already have services in place. when implementing new programmes, recipients could be randomly assigned to different forms of assistance. while advocates may support personal assistance for myriad reasons, this review demonstrates that further studies are required to determine which models of personal assistance are most effective and efficient.
surgical decompression lowers the risk of death and death or severe disability defined as mrs > 4 in selected patients 60 years of age or younger with a massive hemispheric infarction and oedema. optimum criteria for patient selection and for timing of decompressive surgery are yet to be defined. since survival may be at the expense of substantial disability, surgery should be the treatment of choice only when it can be assumed, based on their preferences, that it is in the best interest of patients. since all the trials were stopped early, an overestimation of the effect size cannot be excluded.
the results suggest tai chi does not exacerbate symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. in addition, tai chi has statistically significant benefits on lower extremity range of motion, in particular ankle range of motion, for people with ra. the included studies did not assess the effects on patient-reported pain.
the potential benefits of adding a benzodiazepine to an antidepressant must be balanced judiciously against possible harms including development of dependence and accident proneness, on the one hand, and against continued suffering following no response and drop out, on the other.
to date there is no high quality evidence that omega-3 fatty acids supplementation is effective for improving core and associated symptoms of asd. given the paucity of rigorous studies in this area, there is a need for large well-conducted randomised controlled trials that examine both high and low functioning individuals with asd, and that have longer follow-up periods.
intermediate-dose mifepristone (25-50 mg) was superior to lng and yuzpe regimens. mifepristone low dose (< 25 mg) may be more effective than lng (0.75 mg two doses), but this was not conclusive. upa may be more effective than lng. lng proved to be more effective than the yuzpe regimen. the copper iud was the most effective ec method and was the only ec method to provide ongoing contraception if left in situ.
rofecoxib was voluntarily withdrawn from global markets in october 2004 therefore there are no implications for practice concerning its use. there remains a number of questions over both the benefits and risks associated with cox ii selective agents and further work is ongoing.
there is substantial evidence that elastic compression stockings reduce the occurrence of pts after dvt. no serious adverse effects were mentioned in the studies. hence, elastic compression stockings should be added to the treatment of dvt to prevent the development of post-thrombotic syndrome.
in the trials included in the review, cotrimoxazole prophylaxis had a beneficial effect in preventing death and illness episodes in adults with both early and advanced hiv disease. however, the wider applicability of these findings is unclear, in particular to areas with higher background bacterial resistance to cotrimoxazole. further trials would be required in differing settings to widen applicability.
the review finds some evidence for the effectiveness of parent-mediated interventions, most particularly in proximal indicators within parent-child interaction, but also in more distal indicators of child language comprehension and reduction in autism severity. evidence of whether such interventions may reduce parent stress is inconclusive. the review reinforces the need for attention to be given to early intervention service models that enable parents to contribute skilfully to the treatment of their child with autism. however, practitioners supporting parent-mediated intervention require to monitor levels of parent stress. the ability to draw conclusions from studies would be improved by researchers adopting a common set of outcome measures as the quality of the current evidence is low.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend perineal shaving for women on admission in labour.
the application of sealants is a recommended procedure to prevent or control caries. sealing the occlusal surfaces of permanent molars in children and adolescents reduces caries up to 48 months when compared to no sealant, after longer follow-up the quantity and quality of the evidence is reduced. the review revealed that sealants are effective in high risk children but information on the magnitude of the benefit of sealing in other conditions is scarce. the relative effectiveness of different types of sealants has yet to be established.
there is insufficient evidence to confirm or refute the effectiveness of caffeine avoidance on birthweight or other pregnancy outcomes. there is a need to conduct high-quality, double-blinded rcts to determine whether caffeine has any effect on pregnancy outcome.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised, double-blind trials to suggest an effect of feverfew over and above placebo for preventing migraine. it appears from the data reviewed that feverfew presents no major safety problems.
force platform feedback (visual or auditory) improved stance symmetry but not sway in standing, clinical balance outcomes or measures of independence.
there was insufficient evidence of effectiveness to recommend or advise against iui with or without oh above ti, or vice versa. large, high quality randomised controlled trials, comparing iui with or without oh with pregnancy rate per couple as the main outcome of interest are lacking. there is a need for such trials since firm conclusions cannot be drawn yet.
vaginal preparation with povidone-iodine solution immediately before cesarean delivery reduces the risk of postoperative endometritis. this benefit is particularly realized for women undergoing cesarean delivery with ruptured membranes. as a simple, generally inexpensive intervention, providers should consider implementing preoperative vaginal cleansing with povidone-iodine before performing cesarean deliveries.
dry powder mannitol has been shown to improve tracheobronchial clearance in bronchiectasis, as well as cystic fibrosis, asthmatics, and normal subjects. hypertonic saline has not been specifically tested in bronchiectasis, but improves clearance in these other conditions and in chronic bronchitis. the measurement of health status in one of the studies should be repeated in future longer term randomised controlled studies of mannitol and hypertonic saline. consideration should also be given to exacerbations and symptom scores, as well as drug-related adverse events.
this review provides evidence that multimedia education about medications is more effective than usual care (non-standardised education provided by health professionals as part of usual clinical care) or no education, in improving both knowledge and skill acquisition. it also suggests that multimedia education is at least equivalent to other forms of education, including written education and education provided by a health professional. however, this finding is based on often low quality evidence from a small number of trials. multimedia education about medications could therefore be considered as an adjunct to usual care but there is inadequate evidence to recommend it as a replacement for written education or education by a health professional. multimedia education may be considered as an alternative to education provided by a health professional, particularly in settings where provision of detailed education by a health professional is not feasible. more studies evaluating multimedia educational interventions are required in order to increase confidence in the estimate of effect of the intervention. conclusions regarding the effect of multimedia education were limited by the lack of information provided by study authors about the educational interventions, and variability in their content and quality. studies testing educational interventions should provide detailed information about the interventions and comparators. research is required to establish a framework that is specific for the evaluation of the quality of multimedia educational programs. conclusions were also limited by the heterogeneity in the outcomes reported and the instruments used to measure them. research is required to identify a core set of outcomes which should be measured when evaluating patient educational interventions. future research should use consistent, reliable and validated outcome measures so that comparisons can be made between studies.
there is some evidence to support the use of massage therapy to improve quality of life for people living with hiv/aids (plwha), particularly in combination with other stress-management modalities, and that massage therapy may have a positive effect on immunological function. the trials are small, however, and at moderate risk of bias. further studies are needed using larger sample sizes and rigorous design/reporting before massage therapy can be strongly recommended for plwha.
parenting interventions, most commonly provided within the home using multi-faceted interventions, are effective in reducing child injury. fairly consistent evidence suggests that they also improve home safety. this evidence relates mainly to interventions provided to families from disadvantaged populations, who are at risk of adverse child health outcomes, or whose families may benefit from extra support. further research is required to explore mechanisms by which these interventions may reduce injury, to identify the features of parenting interventions that are necessary or sufficient to reduce injury, and to assess the generalisability of these findings to different population groups.
a single rct showed that the combination of horizontal and vertical eyelid tightening with everting sutures and lateral tarsal strip is highly efficient for entropion compared to vertical tightening with everting sutures alone. retrospective case series studies also support the combined surgical repair but details from these studies on specific surgical techniques cannot be included in the analysis. evidence from a single rct is unlikely to change clinical practice and thus it is still our view that there is a clear need for more randomised studies comparing two or more surgical techniques for entropion surgery addressing the recurrence and complications rate.
drains increase the harms to the patient without providing any additional benefit for patients undergoing open cholecystectomy and should be avoided in open cholecystectomy.
this updated of the review (d'angelo 2002) has showed that there is insufficient evidence to support routine cryopreservation and insufficient evidence for the relative merits of intra-venous albumin versus cryopreservation.
pcv is effective in preventing ipd, x-ray defined pneumonia, and clinical pneumonia among hiv-1 negative and hiv-1 positive children under two years. the impact was greater for vt-ipd than for all serotypes-ipd, and for x-ray defined pneumonia than for clinical pneumonia. an 11% reduction with a 95% ci of -1% to 21% and a p = 0.08 is compatible with reduction in all-cause mortality.
the available evidence regarding surgery for early vulvar cancer is generally poor. from the studies of sufficient quality we concluded that radical local excision is a safe alternative to radical vulvectomy for patients with early vulva carcinoma. contralateral groin node dissection can be omitted in patients with a lateralized tumour, and the triple incision technique is as safe as an en bloc dissection. however, omission of femoral lymph node dissection results in a higher incidence of groin recurrences. further good quality studies are required, though conducting rcts on vulvar cancer treatment may not be realistic due to the rarity of the disease. however, observational studies of higher quality could provide us with more reliable evidence.
evidence for the effectiveness of topically applied local anaesthetics for treating perineal pain is not compelling. there has been no evaluation for the long-term effects of topically applied local anaesthetics.
there is no evidence from randomized controlled trials of differences in patient outcomes for anaesthesia maintained by intravenous versus inhalational anaesthesia during one-lung ventilation. this review highlights the need for continued research into the use of intravenous versus inhalation anaesthesia for one-lung ventilation. future trials should have standardized outcome measures such as death, adverse postoperative outcomes and intraoperative awareness. dropouts and losses to follow up should be reported.
in view of the poor quality of included trials and the heterogeneity between trials, the evidence in favour of a causal association between magnesium supplementation and blood pressure reduction is weak and is probably due to bias. this is because poor quality studies generally tend to over-estimate the effects of treatment. larger, longer duration and better quality double-blind placebo controlled trials are needed to assess the effect of magnesium supplementation on blood pressure and cardiovascular outcomes.
this review identified trial evidence for a range of different topical and systemic interventions for mycosis fungoides. because of substantial heterogeneity in design, small sample sizes, and low methodological quality, the comparative safety and efficacy of these interventions cannot be established on the basis of the included rcts. taking into account the possible serious adverse effects and the limited availability of efficacy data, topical and skin-directed treatments are recommended first, especially in the early stages of disease. more aggressive therapeutic regimens may show improvement or clearance of lesions, but they also result in more adverse effects; therefore, they are to be considered with caution. larger studies with comparable, clearly-defined end points for all stages of mycosis fungoides, and a focus on safety, quality of life, and duration of remission as part of the outcome measures, are necessary.
the current literature is of poor methodological quality and is insufficiently homogeneous to allow the pooling of results. therefore, clearly effective treatments are not supported at this time for the treatment of acute, subacute or chronic symptoms of whiplash-associated disorders.
there is inconclusive evidence for the efficacy and effectiveness of systemic corticosteroids in the treatment of acute gout. patients with gout did not report serious adverse effects from systemic corticosteroids, when used short term.
there remains insufficient data on the effect of swallowing therapy, feeding, and nutritional and fluid supplementation on functional outcome and death in dysphagic patients with acute or subacute stroke. behavioural interventions and acupuncture reduced dysphagia, and pharyngeal electrical stimulation reduced pharyngeal transit time. compared with ngt feeding, peg reduced treatment failures and gastrointestinal bleeding, and had higher feed delivery and albumin concentration. nutritional supplementation was associated with reduced pressure sores, and increased energy and protein intake.
oral ht is highly effective in alleviating hot flushes and night sweats. therapies purported to reduce such symptoms must be assessed in blinded trials against a placebo or a validated therapy because of the large placebo effect seen in well conducted randomised controlled trials, and also because during menopause symptoms may fluctuate and after menopause symptoms often decline. withdrawals due to side-effects were only marginally increased in the ht groups despite the inability to tailor ht in these fixed dose trials. comparisons of hormonal doses, product types or regimens require analysis of trials with these specific "within study" comparisons.
in areas with seasonal malaria transmission, giving antimalarial drugs to preschool children (age < 6 years) as iptc during the malaria transmission season markedly reduces episodes of clinical malaria, including severe malaria. this benefit occurs even in areas where insecticide treated net usage is high.
there is inadequate evidence to support the use of osteotomy for internal fixation of a trochanteric hip fracture. similarly, there is insufficient evidence to support the use of the other techniques examined in the trials included in this review.
antiplatelet therapy with asa for primary prevention in patients with elevated blood pressure provides a benefit, reduction in myocardial infarction, which is negated by a harm of similar magnitude, increase in major haemorrhage. the benefit of antiplatelet therapy for secondary prevention in patients with elevated blood pressure is many times greater than the harm. benefit has not been demonstrated for warfarin therapy alone or in combination with aspirin in patients with elevated blood pressure. ticlopidine, clopidogrel and newer antiplatelet agents such as prasugrel and ticagrelor have not been sufficiently evaluated in patients with high blood pressure. newer antithrombotic oral drugs such as dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban and endosaban are yet to be tested in patients with high blood pressure. further trials of antithrombotic therapy including with newer agents and complete documentation of all benefits and harms are required in patients with elevated blood pressure.
infants who have their ncpap pressure weaned to a predefined level and then stop ncpap completely have less total time on ncpap and shorter durations of oxygen therapy and hospital stay compared with those that have ncpap removed for a predetermined number of hours each day. future trials of withdrawing ncpap should compare proposed strategies with weaning ncpap pressure to a predefined level and then stopping ncpap completely. clear criteria need to be established for the definition of stability prior to attempting to withdraw ncpap.
the summary estimates indicate a protective effect of xiongshao on restenosis and suggest that xiongshao capsule may be used to prevent restenosis after a pci procedure in chd patients. however, this evidence is derived from small randomised trials, all conducted in china, and two of the included trials showed important methodological limitations that undermine the validity of the findings. additional high-quality research trials with sufficient sample size are required.
moderately early corticosteroid therapy (started at 7-14 days) reduces neonatal mortality and cld, but at the cost of important short term adverse effects. limited evidence concerning long term effects is provided by the trials included in this review. the methodological quality of the studies determining the long-term outcome is limited in some cases, the children have been assessed predominantly before school age, and no study has been sufficiently powered to detect important adverse long-term neurosensory outcomes. therefore, given the risk:benefit ratio of short-term effects and the limited long-term follow-up data, it seems appropriate to reserve moderately early corticosteroid treatment to infants who cannot be weaned from mechanical ventilation and to minimise the dose and duration of any course of therapy. more research is urgently needed, including long term follow-up of survivors included in previous and any future trials, before the benefits and risks of postnatal steroid treatment, including initiation at 7-14 days, can be reliably assessed (see dart study; doyle 2000a).
the limited evidence from rcts of anticoagulants versus nsaids or placebo is inconclusive regarding the efficacy and safety of anticoagulants in vte treatment. the use of anticoagulants is widely accepted in clinical practice, so a further rct comparing anticoagulants to placebo could not ethically be carried out.
whilst this review provides some evidence that peer support telephone calls can be effective for certain health-related concerns, few of the studies were of high quality and so results should be interpreted cautiously. there were many methodological limitations thus limiting the generalisability of findings. overall, there is a need for further well designed randomised controlled studies to clarify the cost and clinical effectiveness of peer support telephone calls for improvement in health and health-related behaviour.
ciliary neurotrophic factor treatment had no significant effect on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progression. at high concentrations, several side effects were observed. a combination of ciliary neurotrophic factor with other neurotrophic factors (as suggested by results on animal models) and more efficient delivery methods should be tested.
no large trials of stem cell transplantation have been performed in ischemic stroke patients and it is too early to know whether this intervention can improve functional outcome. large, well-designed trials are needed.
we found one relevant trial which failed to address the characteristics of interest satisfactorily, in terms of severity of angina, for the participants in this review. participants with the most severe symptoms of angina were excluded, therefore the results of this study represent only a subsection of the broader population with the disorder, are not generalizable and provide inconclusive evidence for the effectiveness of enhanced external counterpulsation therapy for chronic angina pectoris.
there was only one randomized trial relevant to the review question. research is urgently needed to identify best practices regarding the timing and forms of nutrition for critically ill infants and children.
the markedly increased fixation failure rate of fixed nail plates compared with the shs is a major consideration and thus the shs appears preferable. there was insufficient evidence from other comparisons of extramedullary implants or on the use of external fixators to draw definite conclusions.
there is no evidence to suggest that marital therapy is more or less effective than individual psychotherapy or drug therapy in the treatment of depression. improvement of relations in distressed couples might be expected from marital therapy. future trials should test whether marital therapy is superior to other interventions for distressed couples with a depressed partner, especially considering the role of potential effect moderators in the improvement of depression.
antipsychotics may be widely used in the treatment of elderly people with schizophrenia, however, based on this systematic review, there are little robust data available to guide the clinician with respect to the most appropriate drug to prescribe. clearly reported large short, medium and long-term randomised controlled trials with participants, interventions and primary outcomes that are familiar to those wishing to help elderly people with schizophrenia are long overdue.
evidence suggests that preoperative iabp may have a beneficial effect on mortality and morbidity in specific high risk patient groups undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting, however there are many problems with the quality, validity and generalisability of the trials. however, the available evidence is not robust enough to extend the use of iabp to truly elective, high risk patients. defining more precisely which patient groups may benefit would be the challenge for the future.
due to the high level of risk of bias in the two included trials there is insufficient evidence to conclude that one intervention is superior to another.
there is insufficient evidence upon which to base selection of physical tests for shoulder impingements, and local lesions of bursa, tendon or labrum that may accompany impingement, in primary care. the large body of literature revealed extreme diversity in the performance and interpretation of tests, which hinders synthesis of the evidence and/or clinical applicability.
overall, the results suggest that fibrin sealants are efficacious in reducing both post-operative blood loss and peri-operative exposure to allogeneic rbc transfusion. although treatment-effect heterogeneity was observed for these primary efficacy outcomes, heterogeneity was generally in terms of the size of effect rather than the direction of effect. fibrin sealants appeared to demonstrate their greatest beneficial effects in the context of orthopaedic surgery, where blood loss is often substantial. trials not involving orthopaedic surgery generally showed a trend toward decreased post-operative blood loss but the observed reductions were not clinically significant. the majority of trials included in this review were small, which raises concerns about the potential effects of publication bias. funnel plot assessment indicates that there is some evidence of publication bias in the form of a missing population of small negative trials. we believe that large, methodologically rigorous, randomised controlled trials of fibrin sealants are needed.
there is moderate quality evidence that computer-generated reminders delivered on paper to healthcare professionals achieve moderate improvement in process of care. two characteristics emerged as significant predictors of improvement: providing space on the reminder for a response from the clinician and providing an explanation of the reminder’s content or advice. the heterogeneity of the reminder interventions included in this review also suggests that reminders can improve care in various settings under various conditions
there are currently no well designed studies focusing on organising the health services of persons with an intellectual disability and concurrent physical problems. there are very few studies of organisational interventions targeting mental health needs and the results of those that were found need corroboration. there is an urgent need for high quality health services research to identify optimal health services for persons with an intellectual disability and concurrent physical problem.
the treatment trials are few, weak methodologically, and involve small sample sizes. the routine use of antibiotics and alpha blockers for chronic abacterial prostatitis is not supported by the existing evidence. the small studies examining thermal therapy appear to demonstrate benefit of clinical significance and merit further evaluation. additional treatment trials are required and they should report important patient characteristics (e.g., race), study design details and utilize clinically relevant and validated assessment measures.
there is insufficient evidence to establish whether silver-containing dressings or topical agents promote wound healing or prevent wound infection; some poor quality evidence for ssd suggests the opposite.
this review provides evidence of improved respiratory function after six months of azithromycin. data beyond six months were less clear, although reduction in pulmonary exacerbation was sustained. treatment appeared safe over a six-month period; however, emergence of macrolide resistance was a concern. a multi-centre trial examining long-term effects of this antibiotic treatment is needed, especially for infants recognised through newborn screening.
the results suggest that the use of silver alloy indwelling catheters for catheterising hospitalised adults short-term reduces the risk of catheter associated bacteriuria. further evaluation is required to confirm if the benefits translate clinically to a reduction in symptomatic urinary tract infection risk, and if this is cost effective considering the increased cost of silver alloy catheters. catheters impregnated with antibiotics are also beneficial in reducing bacteriuria in hospitalised adults catheterised for less than one week but there was insufficient data to draw conclusions about those catheterised for longer. further studies are required to assess the effects of antibiotic impregnated catheters on the risk of symptomatic urinary tract infection. there was not enough evidence to suggest whether or not any standard catheter was better than another in terms of reducing the risk of bacteriuria in hospitalised adults catheterised short-term. siliconised catheters may be less likely to cause urethral side effects in men; however, this result should be interpreted with some caution as the trials were small and the outcome definitions and specific catheters compared varied.
intranasal corticosteroids were well tolerated. while incs tended to improve asthma symptoms and forced expiratory volume in one second, the results did not reach significance. the combination of intranasal plus intrabronchial corticosteroids should remain the current clinical practice until more research is done.
trastuzumab significantly improves os and dfs in her2-positive women with early and locally advanced breast cancer, although it also significantly increases the risk of chf and lvef decline. the available subgroup analyses are limited by the small number of studies. studies that administered trastuzumab concurrently or sequentially did not differ significantly in efficacy. shorter duration of therapy may reduce cardiotoxicity and maintain efficacy, however there is insufficient evidence at present to conclude this due to small numbers of patients in these trials.
levodopa is efficacious for the short-term treatment of rls. augmentation, the clinically most relevant adverse event, was not investigated sufficiently.
some chinese medicinal herbs may work in chronic hepatitis b. however, the evidence is too weak to recommend any single herb. rigorously designed, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials are required.
the prentif cap was as effective as its comparison diaphragm in preventing pregnancy, but the femcap was not. both cervical caps appear to be medically safe.
there is evidence that iui with oh increases the live birth rate compared to iui alone. the likelihood of pregnancy was also increased for treatment with iui compared to ti in stimulated cycles. one adequately powered multicentre trial showed no evidence of effect of iui in natural cycles compared with expectant management. there is insufficient data on multiple pregnancies and other adverse events for treatment with oh. therefore couples should be fully informed about the risks of iui and oh as well as alternative treatment options.
we have found no evidence of any benefit associated with low level laser therapy on venous leg ulcer healing. one small study suggests that a combination of laser and infrared light may promote the healing of venous ulcers, however more research is needed.
this review broadly supports the use of aeds to reduce seizure frequency in people with refractory epilepsy and intellectual disability. the evidence suggests that side effects are similar to those in the general population and that behavioural side effects leading to discontinuation are rare, but that other effects are under-researched.
chinese herbal mixtures may be effective in the treatment of atopic eczema. however, only four small poorly reported rcts of the same product, zemaphyte, were found and the results were heterogeneous. further well-designed, larger scale trials are required, but zemaphyte is no longer being manufactured.
for patients with asthma who require ics, commencing with a moderate dose ics is equivalent to commencing with a high dose ics and down-titrating. the small significant benefits of commencing with a high ics dose are not of sufficient clinical benefit to warrant its use when compared to moderate or low dose ics. initial moderate ics dose appears to be more effective than initial low ics dose. high dose ics may be more effective than moderate or low dose ics for airway hyperresponsiveness. there is no benefit in doubling or quadrupling ics in subjects with stable asthma.
in comparison with placebo, we have found an increased risk of serious adverse events with regular salmeterol. there is also a clear increase in risk of asthma-related mortality in patients not using inhaled corticosteroids in the two large surveillance studies. although the increase in asthma-related mortality was smaller in patients taking inhaled corticosteroids at baseline, the confidence interval is wide, so we cannot conclude that the inhaled corticosteroids abolish the risks of regular salmeterol. the adverse effects of regular salmeterol in children remain uncertain due to the small number of children studied.
two short term trials indicate that lamotrigine has efficacy against primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures; however, this evidence is insufficient to inform clinical practice and longer term active controlled trials are required.
at present, there is no evidence to support the routine use of systemic antibiotics to promote healing in venous leg ulcers. however, the lack of reliable evidence means that it is not possible to recommend the discontinuation of any of the agents reviewed. in terms of topical preparations, there is some evidence to support the use of cadexomer iodine. further good quality research is required before definitive conclusions can be made about the effectiveness of systemic antibiotics and topical preparations such as povidone iodine, peroxide-based preparations, ethacridine lactate, mupirocin and chlorhexidine in healing venous leg ulceration. in light of the increasing problem of bacterial resistance to antibiotics, current prescribing guidelines recommend that antibacterial preparations should only be used in cases of clinical infection and not for bacterial colonisation.
despite their failure to eradicate barrett's oesophagus, the role of medical and surgical interventions to reduce the troubling symptoms and sequelae of gord is not questioned. whether therapies for gord reduce the cancer risk is not yet known. ablative therapies have an increasing role in the management of dysplasia within barrett's and current data would favour the use of radiofrequency ablation compared with photodynamic therapy. radiofrequency ablation has been shown to yield significantly fewer complications than photodynamic therapy and is very efficacious at eradicating both dysplasia and barrett's itself. however, long-term follow-up data are still needed before radiofrequency ablation can be used in routine clinical care without the need for very careful post-treatment surveillance. more clinical trial data and in particular randomised controlled trials are required to assess whether or not the cancer risk is reduced in routine clinical practice.
this review found interventions including providing dietary advice and blood glucose level monitoring for women with pregnancy hyperglycaemia not meeting gdm and t2dm diagnostic criteria helped reduce the number of macrosomic and lga babies without increasing caesarean section and operative vaginal birth rates. it is important to notice that the results of this review were based on four small randomised trials with moderate to high risk of bias without follow-up outcomes for both women and their babies.
there is evidence to support the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for reducing antipsychotic medication in care home residents. however, the review was based on a small number of heterogeneous studies with important methodological shortcomings. the most recent and methodologically most rigorous study showed the most pronounced effect.
the equal effectiveness and tolerability of new atypical drugs in comparison with clozapine is not yet demonstrated. lack of statistical power to determine the comparative efficacy and effectiveness of newer atypical drugs makes it difficult to judge whether newer drugs are more effective, less effective or equivalent. trials of sufficient power, with longer duration, measuring clinically important outcomes, are needed to assess the true comparative clinical effectiveness, tolerability and cost effectiveness of newer drugs in relation to clozapine.
the current body of evidence supporting the use of immunosuppressive agents and cytotoxic therapies is limited. side-effects associated with some of the therapies were severe.
the three studies provide very limited evidence of the efficacy of methadone for cncp, and there were too few data for pooled analysis of efficacy or harm, or to have confidence in the results of the individual studies. no conclusions can be made regarding differences in efficacy or safety between methadone and placebo, other opioids, or other treatments.
in children with mild-moderate asthma, beclomethasone 200 mcg twice daily caused a decrease in linear growth of -1.54 cm per year. these studies lasted a maximum of 54 weeks, so it remains unclear whether the decrease in growth is sustained or whether it reverses with 'catch up' after therapy is discontinued. we are unable to comment on growth effects of other inhaled steroids that have potentially less systemic effects. if inhaled steroids are required to control a child's asthma, we recommend using the minimum dose that effectively controls the child's asthma and closely following growth.
episodic high dose inhaled corticosteroids provide a partially effective strategy for the treatment of mild episodic viral wheeze of childhood. there is no current evidence to favour maintenance low dose inhaled corticosteroids in the prevention and management of episodic mild viral induced wheeze.
allthough some interventions may be promising, there is not sufficient evidence from trials on any intervention to justify widespread implementation. more research is needed on treatments for this painful and distressing condition.
there is limited evidence that misoprostol, vasopressin, bupivacaine plus epinephrine, tranexamic acid, gelatin thrombin matrix, peri-cervical tourniquet, and mesna may reduce bleeding during myomectomy. bupivacaine plus epinephrine has limited clinical importance compared with other interventions as the clinical impact was small. there is no evidence that oxytocin and morcellation reduce blood loss. further well designed studies are required to establish effectiveness, safety and the costs of different interventions for reducing blood loss during myomectomy.
the reviewed trials were highly variable in methods and quality, and the evidence provided by these studies was weak. cure rates with several treatments were variable, and although 5-fu presents therapeutic results that are inferior to those seen with 5-fu + inf α-2a (high dose) and 5-fu + co2 laser + inf α-2a (high dose), the treatment should not be abandoned. topical treatment with 5-fu has a therapeutic effect; however, the benefits and risks have not been determined clearly and further studies are needed.
the absorbable adhesion barrier interceed reduces the incidence of adhesion formation following laparoscopy and laparotomy, but there are insufficient data to support its use to improve pregnancy rates. gore-tex may be superior to interceed in preventing adhesion formation but its usefulness is limited by the need for suturing and later removal. there was no evidence of effectiveness of seprafilm and fibrin sheet in preventing adhesion formation.
further trials are required to assess the benefits and harms of progesterone therapy when given to women considered to be at increased risk of early birth. [note: the 52 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the evidence suggests that there is no obvious superior surgical technique for treating cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in terms of treatment failures or operative morbidity.
there was some evidence on the superiority of pit and fissure sealants over fluoride varnish application in the prevention of occlusal decays. however, current scarce data limit recommendations on whether to apply pit and fissure sealants or fluoride varnishes on occlusal surfaces.
despite the limited number of trials performed, meta-analysis demonstrated a statistically significant decrease in conversion rates among the hand assisted group. there was no difference in operating time or perioperative complication rates. additional adequately powered and methodologically sound trials are needed to determine if there is a clinically important difference in perioperative outcomes. due to significant costs associated with the use of hand-assist devices, economic analyses are also warranted.
the use of opioid antagonists combined with alpha2-adrenergic agonists is a feasible approach to the management of opioid withdrawal. however, it is unclear whether this approach reduces the duration of withdrawal or facilitates transfer to naltrexone treatment to a greater extent than withdrawal managed primarily with an adrenergic agonist. a high level of monitoring and support is desirable for several hours following administration of opioid antagonists because of the possibility of vomiting, diarrhoea and delirium. further research is required to confirm the relative effectiveness of antagonist-induced regimes, as well as variables influencing the severity of withdrawal, adverse effects, the most effective antagonist-based treatment regime, and approaches that might increase retention in subsequent naltrexone maintenance treatment.
we are unable to give any clear recommendations for the use of rituximab as a therapy for rr-ms. the beneficial effects of rituximab for rr-ms remain inconclusive because of the high attrition bias, the small number of participants and the short follow-up. however, short-term treatment with a single course of rituximab resulted to be safe for most patients with rr-ms. the potential benefits of rituximab for treating rr-ms need to be evaluated in large scale studies along with long-term safety. disability progression and quality of life should be addressed in future research.
the benefits of late corticosteroid therapy may not outweigh actual or potential adverse effects. although there continues to be concern about an increased incidence of adverse neurological outcomes in infants treated with postnatal steroids (see also review of "early postnatal corticosteroids for preventing chronic lung disease in preterm infants"), this review of postnatal corticosteroid treatment for cld initiated after seven days of age suggests that late therapy may reduce neonatal mortality without significantly increasing the risk of adverse long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes. however, the methodological quality of the studies determining the long-term outcome is limited in some cases; in some studies the surviving children have only been assessed before school age when some important neurological outcomes cannot be determined with certainty, and no study was sufficiently powered to detect increased rates of important adverse long-term neurosensory outcomes. given the evidence of both benefits and harms of treatment, and the limitations of the evidence at present, it appears prudent to reserve the use of late corticosteroids to infants who cannot be weaned from mechanical ventilation and to minimise the dose and duration of any course of treatment.
there is no evidence to support routine drain use after uncomplicated liver resections.
current evidence suggests that electrical stimulation therapy may provide significant improvements for knee oa, but further studies are required to confirm whether the statistically significant results shown in these trials confer to important benefits.
for patients with acute or subacute lbp, intensive patient education seems to be effective. for patients with chronic lbp, the effectiveness of individual education is still unclear.
a previous cochrane review has shown that pe hastens recovery compared with supportive treatment alone. there are no adequate comparisons of ivig with placebo in adults, but this review provides moderate quality evidence that, in severe disease, ivig started within two weeks from onset hastens recovery as much as pe. adverse events were not significantly more frequent with either treatment but ivig is significantly much more likely to be completed than pe. also, according to moderate quality evidence, giving ivig after pe did not confer significant extra benefit. in children, according to low quality evidence, ivig probably hastens recovery compared with supportive care alone. more research is needed in mild disease and in patients whose treatment starts more than two weeks after onset. dose-ranging studies are also needed.
there is little evidence to recommend that people with asthma supplement or modify their dietary intake of marine n-3 fatty acids (fish oil) in order to improve their asthma control. equally, there is no evidence that they are at risk if they do so.
women with advanced vulval tumours showed no significant difference in overall survival or treatment-related adverse events when chemoradiation (primary or neoadjuvant) was compared with primary surgery. the retrospective studies had a high risk of bias as the entry criteria for primary chemoradiation was based on inoperability or tumour requiring exenteration.the radiochemotherapy regimens varied widely. there was no data on qol. there is no standard terminology for 'operable and inoperable vulval cancer', and for 'primary and neoadjuvant chemoradiation'. stratification according to unresectability of the primary tumour and/or lymph nodes is needed, for good quality comparison.
we found only small, poor quality trials; the evidence is therefore insufficient to determine whether the choice of dressing or topical agent affects the healing of surgical wounds healing by secondary intention. foam is best studied as an alternative for gauze and appears to be preferable as to pain reduction, patient satisfaction and nursing time.
direct evidence on the effect of omega-3 pufa on incident dementia is lacking. the available trials showed no benefit of omega-3 pufa supplementation on cognitive function in cognitively healthy older people. omega-3 pufa supplementation is generally well tolerated with the most commonly reported side-effect being mild gastrointestinal problems. further studies of longer duration are required. longer-term studies may identify greater change in cognitive function in study participants which may enhance the ability to detect the possible effects of omega-3 pufa supplementation in preventing cognitive decline in older people.
there is currently insufficient evidence to assess the effects of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty with or without stenting or primary stenting for vertebral artery stenosis.
cilostazol is more effective than aspirin in the prevention of vascular events secondary to stroke. cilostazol has more minor adverse effects, although there is evidence of fewer bleeds.
there is insufficient evidence to determine the safety and efficacy of flow-cycled compared to time-cycled synchronized ventilation in neonates. large randomized clinical trials using a parallel-group design and reporting on clinically important outcomes are warranted.
vaginal chlorhexidine resulted in a statistically significant reduction in gbs colonization of neonates, but was not associated with reductions in other outcomes. the review currently does not support the use of vaginal disinfection with chlorhexidine in labour for preventing eod. results should be interpreted with caution as the methodological quality of the studies was poor.
the current systematic review is inconclusive, hampered by the inclusion of mainly small trials of questionable quality. the effects of same on both pain and function may be potentially clinically relevant and, although effects are expected to be small, deserve further clinical evaluation in adequately sized randomised, parallel-group trials in patients with knee or hip osteoarthritis. meanwhile, routine use of same should not be advised.
this review supports the efficacy of cbt in reducing gambling behaviour and other symptoms of pathological and problem gambling immediately following therapy. however, the durability of therapeutic gain is unknown. there is preliminary evidence for some benefits from motivational interviewing therapy in terms of reduced gambling behaviour, although not necessarily other symptoms of pathological and problem gambling. however, the findings are based on few studies and additional research is needed to inform conclusions. there is also evidence suggestive of some possible benefit from integrative therapies, and other psychological therapies for pathological and problem gambling. however, there are too few studies and evidence is insufficient to evaluate these therapies. the majority of studies in this review varied in risk of bias, and much of the evidence comes from studies with multiple limitations. the current data may thus reflect overestimates of treatment efficacy.
based on existing trials, there was no clear evidence that preoperative radiotherapy improves the survival of patients with potentially resectable esophageal cancer. these results indicate that if such preoperative radiotherapy regimens do improve survival, then the effect is likely to be modest with an absolute improvement in survival of around 3 to 4%. trials or a meta-analysis of around 2000 patients (90% power, 5% significance level) would be needed to reliably detect such an improvement (from 15 to 20%).
the pulsed dye laser leads to clinically relevant clearance of port-wine stains. a limited number of rcts evaluated the efficacy from intense pulsed light and other laser types. high-quality rcts are needed to assess individual efficacy from different lasers and light sources, as well as participant satisfaction.
resection of the primary tumour in asymptomatic patients with unresectable stage iv colorectal cancer who are managed with chemo/radiotherapy is not associated with a consistent improvement in overall survival. in addition, resection does not significantly reduce the risk of complications from the primary tumour (i.e. obstruction, perforation or bleeding). yet there is enough doubt with regard to the published literature to justify further clinical trials in this area. the results from an ongoing high quality randomised controlled trial will help to answer this question.
currently, there is inadequate evidence to conclude whether milnacipran is superior, inferior or the same as other antidepressive agents in terms of efficacy, acceptability and tolerability in the acute phase treatment of major depression. however, there is some evidence in favour of milnacipran over tcas in terms of dropouts due to adverse events (acceptability) and the rates of experiencing adverse events (tolerability). information about other clinically meaningful outcomes such as cost-effectiveness and social functioning, including the ability to return to work, is lacking. further study is needed to answer whether milnacipran would be the better choice of antidepressant for acute major depression.
there is some evidence of improvement in metabolic control in people with diabetes, after treating periodontal disease. there are few studies available and individually these lacked the power to detect a significant effect. most of the participants in the study had poorly controlled type 2 dm with little data from randomised trials on the effects on people with type 1 dm. improving periodontal health is an important objective in itself. however, in order to understand the potential of this treatment to improve glycaemic control among people with diabetes, larger, carefully conducted and reported studies are needed.
although the results of the study on electroacupuncture show that electroacupuncture may be beneficial to reduce symptomatic knee pain in patients with ra 24 hours and 4 months post treatment, the reviewers concluded that the poor quality of the trial, including the small sample size preclude its recommendation. the reviewers further conclude that acupuncture has no effect on esr, crp, pain, patient's global assessment, number of swollen joints, number of tender joints, general health, disease activity and reduction of analgesics. these conclusions are limited by methodological considerations such as the type of acupuncture (acupuncture vs electroacupuncture), the site of intervention, the low number of clinical trials and the small sample size of the included studies.
adjusted-dose warfarin and related oral anticoagulants reduce stroke, disabling stroke and other major vascular events for those with non-valvular af by about one third when compared with antiplatelet therapy.
this systematic review suggests a benefit of individual education on glycaemic control when compared with usual care in a subgroup of those with a baseline hba1c greater than 8%. however, overall there did not appear to be a significant difference between individual education and usual care. in the small number of studies comparing group and individual education, there was an equal impact on hba1c at 12 to 18 months. additional studies are needed to delineate these findings further.
the evidence suggests non-glucosidic b-sitosterols improve urinary symptoms and flow measures. their long term effectiveness, safety and ability to prevent bph complications are not known.
the present review did not identify sufficient evidence to assess the effectiveness of srom for opioid maintenance because only three studies meeting our inclusion criteria have been identified. two studies suggested a possible reduction of opioid use in people taking srom. in another study, the use of srom was associated with fewer depressive symptoms. retention in treatment was not significantly different among compared interventions while the adverse effects were more frequent with the people given srom.
gcs are effective in diminishing the risk of dvt in hospitalised patients. data examination also suggests that gcs on a background of another method of prophylaxis is more effective than gcs on its own.
statins decreased cholesterol levels in dialysis patients similar to that of the general population. with the exception of one study, studies were of short duration and therefore the efficacy of statins in decreasing the mortality rate is still unclear. statins appear to be safe in this high-risk population. ongoing studies should provide more insight about the efficacy of statins in reducing mortality rates in dialysis patients.
there is evidence to support waiting for at least two or more seizure free years before discontinuing aeds in children, particularly if individuals have an abnormal eeg and partial seizures. there is insufficient evidence to establish when to withdraw aeds in children with generalized seizures. there is no evidence to guide the timing of withdrawal of aeds in seizure free adults. further blinded randomized controlled trials are needed to identify the optimal timing of aed withdrawal and risk factors predictive of relapse.
doses equivalent to 500 mg and 400 mg naproxen administered orally provided effective analgesia to adults with moderate to severe acute postoperative pain. about half of participants treated with these doses experienced clinically useful levels of pain relief, compared to 15% with placebo, and half required additional medication within nine hours, compared to two hours with placebo. associated adverse events did not differ from placebo.
there is insufficient evidence to confirm or refute that albendazole co-administered with dec or ivermectin is more effective than dec or ivermectin alone in clearing microfilariae or killing adult worms. albendazole combined with ivermectin appears to have a small effect on microfilaraemia, but this was not consistently demonstrated. the effect of albendazole against adult and larval filarial parasites, alone and in combination with other antifilarial drugs, deserves further rigorous research.
in the previous version of this review, evidence in support of acupuncture for tension-type headache was considered insufficient. now, with six additional trials, the authors conclude that acupuncture could be a valuable non-pharmacological tool in patients with frequent episodic or chronic tension-type headaches.
no conclusions could be drawn about the short- or long-term use of protein substitute in phenylketonuria due to the lack of adequate or analysable trial data. additional data and randomised controlled trials are needed to investigate the use of protein substitute in phenylketonuria. until further evidence is available, current practice in the use of protein substitute should continue to be monitored with care.
there is weak evidence to support the use of psychosocial interventions for chronic orofacial pain. although significant effects were observed for outcome measures where pooling was possible, the studies were few in number and had high risk of bias. however, given the non-invasive nature of such interventions they should be used in preference to other invasive and irreversible treatments which also have limited or no efficacy. further high quality trials are needed to explore the effects of psychosocial interventions on chronic orofacial pain.
there is no convincing evidence that zinc supplementation to infants or children results in improved motor or mental development.
based on the limited number of published rcts, the bp lowering effect of alpha blockers is modest; the estimate of the magnitude of trough bp lowering of -8/-5 mmhg is likely an overestimate. there are no clinically meaningful bp lowering differences between different alpha blockers. the review did not provide a good estimate of the incidence of harms associated with alpha blockers because of the short duration of the trials and the lack of reporting of adverse effects in many of the trials.
the evidence shows that stockpiled vaccines have maintained their immunogenicity and new cell-cultured vaccines are similar to stockpiled vaccines in terms of vaccination success rate and immunogenicity. first- and second-generation vaccines diluted to at least 1:10 are as effective as undiluted vaccine in terms of clinical success rate and immunogenicity. dilution did not reduce the frequency of adverse events. success rate and immunogenicity were similar in naive and previously vaccinated persons, but there were fewer adverse events in previously vaccinated persons. the rate of adverse events found in this review reveals the need for further development and improvement of smallpox vaccines.
there is evidence that action plans with limited copd education aid recognition of, and response to, an exacerbation with initiation of antibiotics and corticosteroids. only one study measured patients' self health appropriate behaviour (decision making and taking action). there is no evidence of reduced healthcare resources utilisation or improved health-related quality of life.the practice of giving patients an action plan and limited self-management education for the management of copd exacerbations, without a multi-faceted self-management program or ongoing case management cannot be recommended as the standard of care in copd.
we found no evidence regarding the effectiveness of the use of incentive spirometry for prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications in upper abdominal surgery. this review underlines the urgent need to conduct well-designed trials in this field. there is a case for large randomized trials of high methodological rigour in order to define any benefit from the use of incentive spirometry regarding mortality.
the two trials included in this review provide insufficient evidence of the beneficial effect of endolymphatic sac surgery in ménière's disease.
high-concentration topical capsaicin used to treat postherpetic neuralgia and hiv-neuropathy generates more participants with high levels of pain relief than does control treatment using a much lower concentration of capsaicin. the additional proportion who benefit over control is not large, but for those who do obtain high levels of pain relief there are additional improvements in sleep, fatigue, depression and an improved quality of life. high-concentration topical capsaicin is therefore similar to other therapies for chronic pain. in this case, the high cost of single and repeated applications suggest that high-concentration topical capsaicin is likely to be used when other available therapies have failed, and that it should probably not be used repeatedly without substantial documented pain relief. even when efficacy is established, there are unknown risks, especially on epidermal innervation, of repeated application of long periods.
vibroacoustic stimulation offers benefits by decreasing the incidence of non-reactive cardiotocography and reducing the testing time. further randomized trials should be encouraged to determine not only the optimum intensity, frequency, duration and position of the vibroacoustic stimulation, but also to evaluate the efficacy, predictive reliability, safety and perinatal outcome of these stimuli with cardiotocography and other tests of fetal well-being. [note: the eight citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
little evidence from rcts comparing the efficacy of different interventions for primary cutaneous sccs exists. there is a clear need for well-designed randomised studies in order to improve the evidence base for the management of this condition.
this review included only eight small trials and five different comparisons of methods of pedicle fixation in various participants while looking at a variety of outcomes at different time points. overall, evidence is insufficient to inform the selection of different methods of pedicle screw fixation or the combined use of fusion. however, in the absence of robust evidence to support fusion, it is important to factor the risk of long-term donor site pain related to bone harvesting into the decision of whether to use this intervention. further research involving high-quality randomised trials is needed.
there are no high quality data on the efficacy of the dietary treatment of type 2 diabetes, however the data available indicate that the adoption of exercise appears to improve glycated haemoglobin at six and twelve months in people with type 2 diabetes. there is an urgent need for well-designed studies which examine a range of interventions, at various points during follow-up, although there is a promising study currently underway.
since the last version of this review no new studies were found. there was no good quality evidence that antidepressants are effective for narcolepsy or improve quality of life. despite the clinical consensus recommending antidepressants for cataplexy there is scarce evidence that antidepressants have a positive effect on this symptom. there is a clear need for well-designed randomised controlled trials to assess the effect of antidepressants on narcolepsy.
the efficacy of amantadine in reducing fatigue in people with ms is poorly documented, as well as its tolerability. it is advisable to: (1) improve knowledge on the underlying mechanisms of ms-related fatigue; (2) achieve an agreement on accurate, reliable and responsive outcome measures of fatigue; (3) perform good quality rcts.
these three studies no more than hint that sodium valproate may reduce pain in diabetic neuropathy, and divalproex sodium in post-herpetic neuralgia, but the use of 'completer' analysis may overestimate efficacy, and there were too few data for pooled analysis of efficacy or harm, or to have confidence in the results of the individual studies. there is insufficient evidence to support the use of valproic acid or sodium valproate as a first-line treatment for neuropathic pain. there is more robust evidence of greater efficacy for a small number of other drugs.
we did not find evidence to support or refute the use of bisphosphonates for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. the data seem to indicate a possible positive intervention effect of bisphosphonates on decreasing urinary amino telopeptides of collagen i concentration compared with placebo or no intervention with no risk of random error. there is need for more randomised clinical trials assessing the effects of bisphosphonates for osteoporosis on patient-relevant outcomes in primary biliary cirrhosis.
these findings reflect the quality of published data regarding interventions for this aspect of the management of radiation induced complications. although there is grade ic evidence, these studies are not recent, the allocation concealment is unclear in the text, and overall there is a variable level of assessment of the response, emphasising the need for more studies to be conducted with improved designs to clarify the investigative process and support the final result.
there are strong suggestions that rt plus epo has a negative influence on outcome as opposed to rt alone. however, the target haemoglobin concentration, which was higher than recommended in four of the five included rcts, may have had a significant role. nevertheless, based on these findings epo should not be administered as an addition to rt outside the experimental setting for patients with head and neck cancer.
the evidence presented suggests that hcse is an efficacious and safe short-term treatment for cvi. however, several caveats exist and larger, definitive rcts are required to confirm the efficacy of this treatment option.
there is no evidence that auditory integration therapy or other sound therapies are effective as treatments for autism spectrum disorders. as synthesis of existing data has been limited by the disparate outcome measures used between studies, there is not sufficient evidence to prove that this treatment is not effective. however, of the seven studies including 182 participants that have been reported to date, only two (with an author in common), involving a total of 35 participants, report statistically significant improvements in the auditory intergration therapy group and for only two outcome measures (aberrant behaviour checklist and fisher's auditory problems checklist). as such, there is no evidence to support the use of auditory integration therapy at this time.
at the present time, anticonvulsant therapy to term infants in the immediate period following perinatal asphyxia cannot be recommended for routine clinical practice, other than in the treatment of prolonged or frequent clinical seizures. any future studies should be of sufficient size to have the power to detect clinically important reductions in mortality and severe neurodevelopmental disability.
in general, there is little available evidence on the use of psychosocial interventions by general practitioners. of the psychosocial interventions reviewed, problem-solving treatment for depression may offer promise, although a stronger evidence-base is required and the effectiveness in routine practice remains to be demonstrated. more research is required to improve the evidence-base on this subject.
part a 1b - developmental outcomes based on the best current available evidence it would seem advisable for women to continue medication during pregnancy using monotherapy at the lowest dose required to achieve seizure control. polytherapy would seem best avoided where possible. more population based studies adequately powered to examine the effects of in utero exposure to specific monotherapies which are used in everyday practice are required.
parasitological cure can be achieved by single oral dose of nitroimidazole. further research should focus on developing effective partner treatment strategies to prevent reinfections and reduce trichomoniasis prevalence.
in people with copd, pde4 inhibitors offered benefit over placebo in improving lung function and reducing likelihood of exacerbations, however, they had little impact on quality of life or symptoms. gastrointestinal adverse effects and weight loss were common. the optimum place of pde4 inhibitors in copd management remains to be defined. longer-term trials are needed to determine whether or not pde4 inhibitors modify fev1 decline, healthcare utilisation or mortality in copd.
very limited data are available to support the use of thioridazine in the treatment of dementia. if thioridazine were not currently in widespread clinical use, there would be inadequate evidence to support its introduction. the only positive effect of thioridazine when compared to placebo is the reduction of anxiety. when compared to placebo, other neuroleptics, and other sedatives, it has equal or higher rates of adverse effects. clinicians should be aware that there is no evidence to support the use of thioridazine in dementia, and its use may expose patients to excess side effects.
there is currently insufficient evidence to conclude whether surgical or conservative treatment produces superior long-term outcomes for ankle fractures in adults. the identification of several ongoing randomised trials means that better evidence to inform this question is likely to be available in future.
although only based on a small number of studies which vary in quality, behavioural or cognitive-behaviour therapy alone appears to be an effective treatment for ocd in children and adolescents. it is as effective as medication alone and may lead to better outcomes when combined with medication compared to medication alone. additional higher quality trials are needed to confirm these findings.
there is only limited evidence to support the effectiveness of local cooling treatments (ice packs, cold gel pads, cold/iced baths) applied to the perineum following childbirth to relieve pain.
evidence from one trial does not support the use of ivig for the management of adults with presumed viral myocarditis. there are no randomized paediatric trials. further studies of the pathophysiology of this entity would lead to improved diagnostic criteria which would facilitate future research.
at the moment there is no evidence from individual studies in children with osteosarcoma and hepatoblastoma treated with different platinum analogues and dosage schedules which underscores the use of amifostine as an otoprotective intervention as compared to no additional treatment. since pooling of results was not possible and all studies had serious methodological limitations, no definitive conclusions can be made. it should be noted that 'no evidence of effect', as identified in this review, is not the same as 'evidence of no effect'. based on the currently available evidence, we are not able to give recommendations for clinical practice. for other possible otoprotective medical interventions and other types of malignancies no eligible studies were identified, so no conclusions can be made about their efficacy in preventing ototoxicity in children treated with platinum-based therapy. more high quality research is needed.
clinicians considering the use of tcas need to be aware of the limited and conflicting evidence of effect and the side effect profile when discussing this treatment option with people who have asd and their carers. further research is required before tcas can be recommended for treatment of individuals with asd.
in conclusion, there is moderate to high quality evidence that both lipid-based nutrient supplements and blended foods are effective in treating children with mam. although lipid-based nutrient supplements (lns) led to a clinically significant benefit in the number of children recovered in comparison with blended foods, lns did not reduce mortality, the risk of default or progression to sam. it also induced more vomiting. blended foods such as csb++ may be equally effective and cheaper than lns. most of the research so far has focused on industrialised foods, and on short-term outcomes of mam. there are no studies evaluating interventions to improve the quality of the home diet, an approach that should be evaluated in settings where food is available, and nutritional education and habits are the main determinants of malnutrition. there are no studies from asia, where moderate acute malnutrition is most prevalent.
many different interventions were reported to produce "improvement" in ppp. there is, however, no standardised method for assessing response to treatment, and reductions in pustule counts or other empirical semi-quantitative scoring systems may be of little relevance to the patient. this review has shown that the ideal treatment for ppp remains elusive and that the standards of study design and reporting need to be improved to inform patients and those treating them of the relative merits of the many treatments available to them.
treatment of depression in adults with low dose tricyclics is justified. however, more rigorous studies are needed to definitively establish the relative benefits and harms of varying dosages.
corticosteroids are used for treating acute nerve damage in leprosy, but evidence from two randomised controlled trials, treating either long-standing or mild nerve function impairment, did not show a significant long-term effect. a third trial showed significant benefit of a five-month steroid regimen over a three-month regimen. standard corticosteroid regimens are not significantly more harmful than placebo treatment, despite known adverse effects of corticosteroids. further randomised controlled trials are needed to establish the effectiveness of corticosteroids and the optimal regimens and to examine new therapies. future trials should pay more attention to non-clinical aspects, such as costs and impact on quality of life, because these are highly relevant indicators for both policy makers and participants.
there is currently insufficient evidence on the efficacy, tolerability and likely costs of helminth therapy to support its use in the routine management of allergic rhinitis. administered to humans in carefully measured doses, helminths appear to be safe. more preclinical studies should be performed, before larger and extended duration trials of helminths for allergic rhinitis are carried out. future studies should collect and report comparative data on the costs of helminth therapy versus conventional pharmacotherapy.
a single dose (1.0 mg) of intramuscular vitamin k after birth is effective in the prevention of classic hdn. either intramuscular or oral (1.0 mg) vitamin k prophylaxis improves biochemical indices of coagulation status at 1-7 days. neither intramuscular nor oral vitamin k has been tested in randomized trials with respect to effect on late hdn. oral vitamin k, either single or multiple dose, has not been tested in randomized trials for its effect on either classic or late hdn.
additional endoscopic treatment after epinephrine injection reduces further bleeding and the need for surgery in patients with high bleeding peptic ulcer.
magnesium sulphate for women with eclampsia reduces the risk ratio of maternal death and of recurrence of seizures, compared with diazepam.
flumazenil had a significant beneficial effect on short-term improvement of hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis and a highly favourable prognosis. flumazenil had no significant effect on recovery or survival. considering the fluctuating nature of hepatic encephalopathy, future trials should use a parallel design and assess if treatment with flumazenil leads to a sustained improvement or increased recovery and survival. until this has been demonstrated, flumazenil may be considered for patients with chronic liver disease and hepatic encephalopathy, but cannot be recommended for routine clinical use.
during primary surgery for advanced stage epithelial ovarian cancer all attempts should be made to achieve complete cytoreduction. when this is not achievable, the surgical goal should be optimal (< 1 cm) residual disease. due to the high risk of bias in the current evidence, randomised controlled trials should be performed to determine whether it is the surgical intervention or patient-related and disease-related factors that are associated with the improved survival in these groups of women. the findings of this review that women with residual disease < 1 cm still do better than women with residual disease > 1 cm should prompt the surgical community to retain this category and consider re-defining it as 'near optimal' cytoreduction, reserving the term 'suboptimal' cytoreduction to cases where the residual disease is > 1 cm (optimal/near optimal/suboptimal instead of complete/optimal/suboptimal).
d-penicillamine did not appear to reduce the risk of mortality, but significantly increased the occurrences of adverse events in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. we do not support the use of d-penicillamine for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
multicomponent fortification of human milk is associated with short-term improvements in weight gain, linear and head growth. despite the absence of evidence of long-term benefit and insufficient evidence to be reassured that there are no deleterious effects, it is unlikely that further studies evaluating fortification of human milk versus no supplementation will be performed. further research should be directed toward comparisons between different proprietary preparations and evaluating both short-term and long-term outcomes in search of the "optimal" composition of fortifiers.
stroke patients who receive organised inpatient care in a stroke unit are more likely to be alive, independent, and living at home one year after the stroke. the benefits were most apparent in units based in a discrete ward. no systematic increase was observed in the length of inpatient stay.
there is no evidence that hypothermia is beneficial in the treatment of head injury. hypothermia may be effective in reducing death and unfavourable outcomes for traumatic head injured patients, but significant benefit was only found in low quality trials. low quality trials have a tendency to overestimate the treatment effect. the high quality trials found no decrease in the likelihood of death with hypothermia, but this finding was not statistically significant and could be due to the play of chance. hypothermia should not be used except in the context of a high quality randomised controlled trial with good allocation concealment.
we do not recommend that gnrh agonists be routinely used as a final oocyte maturation trigger in fresh autologous cycles because of lowered live birth rates and ongoing pregnancy rates. an exception could be made for women with high risk of ohss, after appropriate counselling.
the effectiveness of occupational therapy for cognitive impairment post-stroke remains unclear. the potential benefits of cognitive retraining delivered as part of occupational therapy on improving basic daily activity function or specific cognitive abilities, or both, of people who have had a stroke cannot be supported or refuted by the evidence included in this review. more research is required.
bone scaffolding may improve anatomical outcome compared with plaster cast alone but there is insufficient evidence to conclude on functional outcome and safety; or for other comparisons.
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of uterine muscle relaxant drugs for women with threatened miscarriage. any such use should be restricted to the context of randomised trials.
evidence provided in this review is insufficient to recommend the use of zinc as an adjunct to standard antibiotic therapy for pneumonia in children aged two to 35 months.
it is not possible to make any recommendations for antidepressant treatment in postnatal depression from this single small trial. more trials are needed, with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up periods, to compare different antidepressants in the treatment of postnatal depression, to compare antidepressant treatment with psychosocial interventions and to assess adverse effects of antidepressants. treatment of postnatal depression is an area that has been neglected despite the large public health impact described above.
the chiva method reduces recurrence of varicose veins and produces fewer side effects than vein stripping. however, we based these conclusions on a small number of trials with a high risk of bias as the effects of surgery could not be concealed. new rcts are needed to confirm these results and to compare chiva with approaches other than open surgery.
there is evidence to support use of intravenous immunoglobulins as a preventative treatment for relapses in relapsing remitting ms. there was no evidence of delay in progression of disease in secondary progressive ms, but this needs to be evaluated in relapsing remitting disease. immunoglobulins were well tolerated with a less than 5% risk of drug related adverse events in participants in included trials.
placebo-controlled trials of allylamines and azoles for athlete's foot consistently produce much higher percentages of cure than placebo. allylamines cure slightly more infections than azoles and are now available otc. further research into the effectiveness of antifungal agents for nail infections is required.
both os and pfs were improved with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. although the effects were less clear on all other pre-specified outcomes, they all tended to be in favour of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. whilst these results appear to indicate that neoadjuvant chemotherapy may offer a benefit over surgery alone for women with early-stage or locally-advanced cervical cancer, the evidence is based on only a small number of trials, and further research may be warranted.
trabeculectomy with beta irradiation has a lower risk of surgical failure compared to trabeculectomy alone. a trial of beta irradiation versus anti-metabolite is warranted.
the available data of the effects of olanzapine in ocd are too limited to draw any conclusions. there is some evidence that adding quetiapine or risperidone to antidepressants increases efficacy, but this must be weighed against less tolerability and limited data.
it is unclear if oral antibiotics (isoniazid, erythromycin, or a combination of isoniazid plus rifampicin) are effective for the resolution of bcg-induced disease. most non-suppurated lymphadenitis will resolve without treatment in 4 to 6 months. patients with lymphadenitis abscess might benefit from needle aspiration and possibly local instillation of isoniazid could shorten recovery time. included studies were generally small and could be better conducted. further research should evaluate the use of needle aspiration and local instillation of isoniazid in fluctuant nodes. therapeutic and preventive measures in hiv-infected infants could be important given the higher risk of negative outcomes in this group.
early feeding after major abdominal gynaecologic surgery is safe however associated with the increased risk of nausea and a reduced length of hospital stay. whether to adopt the early feeding approach should be individualised. further studies should focus on the cost-effectiveness, patient's satisfaction, and other physiological changes.
prostate cancer screening did not significantly decrease prostate cancer-specific mortality in a combined meta-analysis of five rcts. only one study (erspc) reported a 21% significant reduction of prostate cancer-specific mortality in a pre-specified subgroup of men aged 55 to 69 years. pooled data currently demonstrates no significant reduction in prostate cancer-specific and overall mortality. harms associated with psa-based screening and subsequent diagnostic evaluations are frequent, and moderate in severity. overdiagnosis and overtreatment are common and are associated with treatment-related harms. men should be informed of this and the demonstrated adverse effects when they are deciding whether or not to undertake screening for prostate cancer. any reduction in prostate cancer-specific mortality may take up to 10 years to accrue; therefore, men who have a life expectancy less than 10 to 15 years should be informed that screening for prostate cancer is unlikely to be beneficial. no studies examined the independent role of screening by dre.
progestogens administered from day 15 or 19 to day 26 of the cycle offer no advantage over other medical therapies such as danazol, tranexamic acid, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) and the ius in the treatment of menorrhagia in women with ovulatory cycles. progestogen therapy for 21 days of the cycle results in a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss, although women found the treatment less acceptable than intrauterine levonorgestrel. this regimen of progestogen may have a role in the short-term treatment of menorrhagia.
given an event rate of 7.5% in the included trials' control group, prophylaxis for pcp using tmp/smx is highly effective among non-hiv immunocompromised patients, with a number needed to treat for an additional beneficial outcome of 15 patients (95% ci 13 to 20). prophylaxis should be considered for patients with hematological malignancies, bone marrow transplantation and solid organ transplantation included in these trials.
there is a lack of evidence from randomised controlled trials to inform the choice of prosthetic rehabilitation, including the optimum weight of prosthesis, after unilateral transfemoral amputation in older dysvascular people. a programme of research, including randomised controlled trials to examine key interventions, is urgently required in this area.
there is currently no evidence to support the use of cftr gene transfer reagents as a treatment for lung disease in people with cystic fibrosis. future studies need to investigate clinically important outcome measures.
on the basis of the studies reviewed here, adalimumab in combination with methotrexate is efficacious and safe in the treatment of the rheumatoid arthritis. adalimumab 40 mg sc e.o.w. and 20 mg e.w. slows the radiographic progression at 52 weeks. adalimumab in combination with dmards other than methotrexate is also efficacious and safe, even though data from one only study are available and the number of patients in each group is low. adalimumab in monotherapy is efficacious and safe in the treatment of the rheumatoid arthritis but the effect size is lower than with combined therapy.
the results from this review suggest that area-wide traffic calming in towns and cities may be a promising intervention for reducing the number of road traffic injuries and deaths. however, further rigorous evaluations of such interventions are needed.
although a number of studies suggest that tens may produce short lived improvements in some neuropsychological or behavioural aspects of dementia, the limited presentation and availability of data from these studies does not allow definite conclusions on the possible benefits of this intervention. since most of the currently published studies are well designed, although the numbers of subjects in each study is small, analysis of the complete original data from these and/or future studies may allow more definitive conclusions to be drawn.
endoscopic balloon dilation is slightly less successful than endoscopic sphincterotomy in stone extraction and more risky regarding pancreatitis. however, endoscopic balloon dilation seems to have a clinical role in patients who have coagulopathy, who are at risk for infection, and possibly in those who are older.
there is no evidence from rcts to show an effect of low gi diets on coronary heart disease. weak evidence for minor effects on some chd risk factors was found. many of the trials identified were short-term, of poor quality and did not have sufficient power to detect clinically important differences. the combined evidence from the studies suggests that any beneficial effect of low glycaemic index diets on chd and its risk factors is small. there is a need for well designed, adequately powered, randomised controlled studies, of greater than 12 weeks duration to assess the true effects of low glycaemic index diets for chd.
the use of colonic stent in malignant colorectal obstruction seems to have no advantage over emergency surgery. the clinical success rate was statistically higher in emergency surgery group. however, use of colorectal stents seems to be as safe in the malignant colorectal obstruction as the emergency surgery with no statistically significant difference in the mortality and morbidity. colorectal stents are associated with acceptable stent perforation, migration and obstruction rates. the advantages of colorectal stent includes shorter hospital stay and procedure time and less blood loss. however, due to the variability in the sample size and trial designs in the included studies, further randomised trials with bigger sample size and well defined trial design are needed to achieve the robust evidence.
although caution is needed when assessing results from a limited number of small clinical trials at present there is no current evidence supporting the clinical use of anticonvulsants medications in the treatment of cocaine dependence. aiming to answer the urgent demand of clinicians, patients, families, and the community as a whole for an adequate treatment for cocaine dependence, we need to improve the primary research in the field of addictions in order to make the best possible use out of a single study and to investigate the efficacy of other pharmacological agent.
based on 23 trials, all at high risk of bias, there is insufficient evidence to establish the value of combination therapy over monotherapy for people with ia. importantly, there are no studies addressing the value of combination therapy for patients with ia who have persistent pain despite optimal disease suppression. well designed trials are needed to address this question.
no significant effect of urokinase or ethanol lock in addition to systemic antibiotics was found. however, this could be due to low power or a too-short follow-up. the cohort studies identified no adverse events; some cohort studies reported cvc malfunctioning. no rcts or ccts were published on antibiotic lock treatment alone. more well-designed rcts are needed to further explore the effect of antibiotic or other lock treatments in the treatment of cvc-related infections in children with cancer.
this review supports the practice of treating kinship care as a viable out-of-home placement option for children removed from the home for maltreatment. however, this conclusion is tempered by the pronounced methodological and design weaknesses of the included studies.
counselling is associated with significantly greater clinical effectiveness in short-term mental health outcomes compared to usual care, but provides no additional advantages in the long-term. participants were satisfied with counselling. although some types of health care utilisation may be reduced, counselling does not seem to reduce overall healthcare costs. the generalisability of these findings to settings outside the united kingdom is unclear.
there is insufficient evidence on which to base recommendations for thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and the early postnatal period. large scale randomised trials of currently-used interventions should be conducted.
overall, there is weak and inconsistent evidence regarding the effectiveness of psychological interventions for the treatment of premature ejaculation. three of the four included randomised controlled studies of psychotherapy for pe reported our primary outcome (improvement in ielt), and the majority have a small sample size. the early success reports (97.8%) of masters and johnson could not be replicated. one study found a significant improvement from baseline in the duration of intercourse, sexual satisfaction and sexual function with a new functional-sexological treatment and behavior therapy compared to waiting list. one study showed that the combination of chlorpromazine and bt was superior to chlorpromazine alone. randomised trials with larger group samples are still needed to further confirm or deny the current available evidence for psychological interventions for treating pe.
different methods of communicating with children and adolescents about a family member's cancer have not been widely evaluated in controlled trials. there is weak evidence to suggest that some interventions, such as structured group interventions, may lead to improvements in knowledge and understanding, in coping, anxiety, adjustment and wellbeing. more research is needed to investigate the comparative value of these interventions.
telehealthcare interventions are unlikely to result in clinically relevant improvements in health outcomes in those with relatively mild asthma, but they may have a role in those with more severe disease who are at high risk of hospital admission. further trials evaluating the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a range of telehealthcare interventions are needed.
at present there is no sufficient evidence to state that oral appliances or functional orthopaedic appliances are effective in the treatment of osas in children. oral appliances or functional orthopaedic appliances may be helpful in the treatment of children with craniofacial anomalies which are risk factors for apnoea.
there is some evidence that using rhgh in people with large burns (more than 40% of the total body surface area) could result in more rapid healing of the burn wound and donor sites in adults and children, and in reduced length of hospital stay, without increased mortality or scarring, but with an increased risk of hyperglycaemia. this evidence is based on studies with small sample sizes and risk of bias and requires confirmation in higher quality, adequately powered trials.
there is no convincing evidence to support the use of any interventions for psychosexual dysfunction in women treated for gynaecological cancer. there is a need for more studies of high methodological quality.
it was not possible to carry out a meta-analysis of the evidence from rcts because of methodological, clinical and statistical heterogeneity. one limitation across all studies was the lack of a description of important characteristics that define the informal caregiver population. however, 'vocational educational' type interventions delivered to caregivers prior to the stroke survivor's discharge from hospital appear to be the most promising intervention. however, this is based on the results from one, small, single-centre study.
direct thrombin inhibitors are as effective in the prevention of major venous thromboembolism in thr or tkr as lmwh and vitamin k antagonists. however, they show higher mortality and cause more bleeding than lmwh. no severe hepatic complications were reported in the analysed studies. use of ximelagatran is not recommended for vte prevention in patients who have undergone orthopedic surgery. more studies are necessary regarding dabigatran.
weak evidence exists for the effectiveness of protein and energy feeds. adequately sized randomised trials with robust methodology are required. in particular, the role of dietetic assistants, and peripheral venous feeding require further evaluation.
a review of the published evidence found that one trial reported gemcitabine plus cisplatin had a better safety profile than mvac and may be considered the first choice for treatment of metastatic bladder cancer. however, the data are limited to one trial only. patients unable to tolerate cisplatin may benefit from gemcitabine plus carboplatin.
compared to placebo, patients treated with heparins had similar risk of mortality, revascularization, recurrent angina, major bleeding and thrombocytopenia. however, those treated with heparins had decreased risk of mi and a higher incidence of minor bleeding.
either combined therapy or psychotherapy alone may be chosen as first line treatment for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, depending on patient preference.
there is inadequate information available at present to ascertain the optimal therapy for pemphigus vulgaris or pemphigus foliaceus. further research is required, especially to assess the optimal glucocorticoid dose, the role of adjuvant immunosuppressive medications, and long-term adverse events to improve harm:benefit analyses.
prophylactic antibiotics in chronic bronchitis/copd have a small but statistically significant effect in reducing the days of illness due to exacerbations of chronic bronchitis. they do not have a place in routine treatment because of concerns about the development of antibiotic resistance and the possibility of adverse effects. the available data are over 30 years old, so the pattern of antibiotic sensitivity may have changed and there is a wider range of antibiotics in use.
given the relatively small number of patients in the pooled analysis, the small number of events and the high risk and unclear risk of bias in the included studies, there is insufficient evidence to make conclusions about the efficacy of probiotics for maintenance of remission in uc. there is a lack of well-designed rcts in this area and further research is needed.
no significant differences were evident between the effect of ncs and scg during the immediate post-exercise period in adults and children with eib with regards to pulmonary function - specifically maximum percent decrease in fev1, complete protection, clinical protection, or side effects.
topical permethrin appears to be the most effective treatment for scabies. ivermectin appears to be an effective oral treatment. more research is needed on the effectiveness of malathion, particularly when compared to permethrin, and on the management of scabies in an institutional setting and at a community level.
in one study beclomethasone dipropionate (400 micrograms per day) was no different from placebo in reducing the frequency of cough measured objectively or scored subjectively. there might be a small improvement with very high-dose inhaled corticosteroid but the clinical impact of this is unlikely to beneficial.
p. sidoides may be effective in alleviating symptoms of acute rhinosinusitis and the common cold in adults, but doubt exists. it may be effective in relieving symptoms in acute bronchitis in adults and children, and sinusitis in adults. reliable data on treatment for other aris were not identified.
theophylline has a modest effect on fev1 and fvc and slightly improves arterial blood gas tensions in moderate to severe copd. these benefits were seen in participants receiving a variety of different concomitant therapies. improvement in exercise performance depended on the method of testing. there was a very low dropout rate in the studies that could be included in this review, which suggests that recruited participants may have been known by the investigators to be theophylline tolerant . this may limit the generalisability of these studies.
clobazam as an add-on treatment may reduce seizure frequency and may be most effective in partial onset seizures. however, it is not clear who will best benefit and over what time-frame. a large scale, randomised controlled trial conducted over a greater period of time, incorporating subgroups with differing seizure types, is required to inform clinical practice.
it is difficult to draft conclusions on the basis of only two trials. one of the possible reason for the lack of evidence could be the difficulty to conduct trial with young people due to practical and ethic reasons.
based on the results of the currently available evidence, inhalation corticosteroids initiated at ≥ 7 days of life for preterm infants at high risk of developing bpd cannot be recommended at this point in time. more and larger randomised, placebo-controlled trials are needed to establish the efficacy and safety of inhalation corticosteroids.
in infants with mas, surfactant administration may reduce the severity of respiratory illness and decrease the number of infants with progressive respiratory failure requiring support with ecmo. the relative efficacy of surfactant therapy compared to, or in conjunction with, other approaches to treatment including inhaled nitric oxide, liquid ventilation, surfactant lavage and high frequency ventilation remains to be tested.
evidence exists for the care of children with congenital or developmental bilateral cataracts to reduce the occurrence of visual axis opacification. further randomised trials are required to inform modern practice about other concerns including the timing of surgery, age for implantation of an intraocular lens and development of long-term complications such as glaucoma and retinal detachment.
magnesium sulphate is ineffective at delaying birth or preventing preterm birth, and its use is associated with an increased mortality for the infant. any further trials should be of high quality, large enough to assess serious morbidity and mortality, compare different dose regimens, and provide neurodevelopmental status of the child.
sponsorship of drug and device studies by the manufacturing company leads to more favorable results and conclusions than sponsorship by other sources. our analyses suggest the existence of an industry bias that cannot be explained by standard 'risk of bias' assessments.
based upon moderate evidence from five trials, our review was unable to establish any advantage in terms of pain, function, shoulder range of motion or safety, of ultrasound-guided glucocorticoid injection for shoulder disorders over either landmark-guided or intramuscular injection. the lack of any added benefit of ultrasound guided subacromial bursal injection over glucocorticoid injection administered into the upper gluteal muscles of the buttock suggests that the benefits of glucocorticoid may arise through systemic rather than local effects. therefore, although ultrasound guidance may improve the accuracy of injection to the putative site of pathology in the shoulder, it is not clear that this improves its efficacy to justify the significant added cost.
based on the available trials, the evidence does not support the administration of oral immunoglobulin for the prevention of nec. there are no randomised controlled trials of oral iga alone for the prevention of nec.
the evidence comes mainly from one large trial. for patients in good clinical condition with ruptured aneurysms of either the anterior or posterior circulation we have firm evidence that, if the aneurysm is considered suitable for both surgical clipping and endovascular treatment, coiling is associated with a better outcome.
current clinical evidence from three small rcts indicates progesterone may improve the neurologic outcome of patients suffering tbi. this evidence is still insufficient and further multicentre randomised controlled trials are required.
there is some evidence to suggest suctioning without disconnection from the ventilator improves the short term outcomes; however the evidence is not strong enough to recommend this practice as the only method of endotracheal suctioning. future research utilising larger trials needs to address the implications of the different techniques on ventilator associated pneumonia, pulmonary morbidities and neurodevelopment. infants less than 28 weeks also need to be included in the trials.
in the one trial comparing protein containing synthetic surfactants compared to protein free synthetic surfactant for the prevention of rds, no statistically different clinical differences in death and chronic lung disease were noted. clinical outcomes between the two groups were generally similar although the group receiving protein containing synthetic surfactants did have decreased incidence of respiratory distress syndrome. further well designed studies comparing protein containing synthetic surfactant to the more widely used animal derived surfactant extracts are indicated.
there is insufficient evidence that carnitine for the treatment of ms-related fatigue offers a therapeutic advantage over placebo or active comparators. results of the ongoing trial are eagerly anticipated in order to provide clarity.
the currently available evidence supports the use of cholinesterase inhibitors in patients with pdd, with a positive impact on global assessment, cognitive function, behavioural disturbance and activities of daily living rating scales. the effect in dlb remains unclear. there is no current disaggregated evidence to support their use in cind-pd.
there is insufficient evidence for reliable conclusions about the effects of progesterone for preventing pre-eclampsia and its complications. therefore, progesterone should not be used for this purpose in clinical practice at present.
the limited data available show that compared to immediate primary end-to-end repair of oasis, early primary overlap repair appears to be associated with lower risks for faecal urgency and anal incontinence symptoms. as the experience of the surgeon is not addressed in the three studies reviewed, it would be inappropriate to recommend one type of repair in favour of another. [note: the six citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
routine prophylactic gastrojejunostomy is indicated in patients with unresectable periampullary cancer undergoing exploratory laparotomy (with or without hepaticojejunostomy).
in view of this lack of evidence, it is impossible to determine whether beta-blocker therapy is effective and safe for the treatment of tremor in parkinson's disease. the high frequency of bradycardia in one trial raises some concerns about the prescription of beta-blockers to normotensive elderly patients but the study was too small for the true degree of risk to be calculated.
apd has not been shown to have significant advantages over capd in terms of important clinical outcomes. apd may however be considered advantageous in select group of patients such as in the younger pd population and those in employment or education due to its psychosocial advantages. there is a need for a rct comparing capd with apd with sufficiently large patient numbers looking at important clinical outcomes including residual renal function, accompanied by an economic evaluation to clarify the relative clinical and cost-effectiveness of both modalities.
early pcv chemotherapy in addition to standard treatment of surgery and rt does not improve os in patients with ao or aoa. however, it does improve pfs. it also is associated with significant toxicities. tumors with 1p and 19q co-deletions are associated with better os and may indicate a more chemo-responsive tumor.
a single dose of an anticholinergic agent is not effective for the treatment of mild and moderate exacerbations and is insufficient for the treatment of severe exacerbations. adding multiple doses of anticholinergics to beta2 agonists appears safe, improves lung function and would avoid hospital admission in 1 of 12 such treated patients. although multiple doses should be preferred to single doses of anticholinergics, the available evidence only supports their use in school-aged children with severe asthma exacerbation. there is no conclusive evidence for using multiple doses of anticholinergics in children with mild or moderate exacerbations.
there is limited evidence to support sildenafil citrate as an effective treatment for ed in patients with ms. future well designed randomised, double blinded, placebo-controlled trials with long-term duration are needed.
nedocromil sodium used before exercise reduces the severity and duration of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. this effect appears to be more pronounced in people with severe exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.
day-case elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy seems to be a safe and effective intervention in selected patients (with no or minimal systemic disease and within easy reach of the hospital) with symptomatic gallstones. because of the decreased hospital stay, it is likely to save costs.
the evidence for avocado-soybean unsaponifiables in the treatment of osteoarthritis is convincing but evidence for the other herbal interventions is insufficient to either recommend or discourage their use.
a single small study has found a short-term beneficial effect on the ahi in children with mild to moderate osa. however, long-term safety and efficacy data are not available yet. further rcts are needed to evaluate anti-inflammatory drugs for osa in children.
the authors of this review have been unable to identify the most effective intervention or to assess the associated risks. research is urgently needed into the effectiveness of oral versus topical antibiotics in this group of patients. clinicians considering antibiotic treatment need to balance any potential benefit against the risks of side effects and antibiotic resistance.
in people not previously exposed to hepatitis b, vaccination has unclear effect on the risk of developing infection, as compared to no vaccination. the risk of lacking protective antibody levels as well as serious and non-serious adverse events appear comparable among recipients and non-recipients of hepatitis b vaccine.
in generalised mg, limited evidence from small rcts suggests that ciclosporin, as monotherapy or with corticosteroids, or cyclophosphamide with corticosteroids, significantly improve mg. limited evidence from rcts shows no significant benefit from azathioprine (as monotherapy or with steroids), mycophenolate mofetil (as monotherapy or with either corticosteroids or ciclosporin) or tacrolimus (with corticosteroids or plasma exchange). bigger, better-designed, longer trials are needed.
there is some evidence from two trials that insecticides are effective in reducing trachoma, however, this effect was not demonstrated in another trial that used insecticides. two trials on latrine provision as a fly control measure have not demonstrated significant trachoma reduction. health education had shown significant reduction of trachoma in one study but another study did not demonstrate similar findings. generally there is a dearth of data to determine the effectiveness of all aspects of environmental sanitation in the control of trachoma.
the available evidence suggests that group antenatal care is positively viewed by women with no adverse outcomes for themselves or their babies. this review is limited owing to the small number of studies/women and the majority of the analyses are based on a single study. more research is required to determine if group antenatal care is associated with significant benefits.
there is moderate quality evidence, coming from two trials which suggests that mi is effective in reducing short term viral load and unprotected sexual acts. there is moderate quality evidence from one trial that mi is effective in reducing alcohol use. there is a need for more trials which report on outcomes such as adherence to medication, mortality and quality of life in youth.
corticosteroid therapy is more effective than enteral nutrition for inducing remission of active crohn's disease as was found in previous systematic reviews. protein composition does not influence the effectiveness of en in the treatment of active cd. a non significant trend favouring very low fat and/or very low long chain triglyceride content exists but larger trials are required to explore the significance of this finding.
ssris are more effective than placebo for ocd, at least in the short-term, although there are differences between the adverse effects of individual ssri drugs. the longer term efficacy and tolerability of different ssri drugs for ocd has yet to be established.
to date, three rcts have evaluated the effects of deworming on markers of hiv-1 disease progression in helminth and hiv-1 co-infected individuals. all trials demonstrate benefit in attenuating or reducing plasma viral load and/or increasing cd4 counts. when taken together, there is evidence of benefit for deworming hiv-1 co-infected adults. given that these studies evaluated different helminth species and different interventions, further trials are warranted to evaluate species-specific effects and to document long-term clinical outcomes following deworming.
tailoring the dose of inhaled corticosteroids based on exhaled nitric oxide in comparison to clinical symptoms was carried out in different ways in the six studies and found only modest benefit at best and potentially higher doses of inhaled corticosteroids in children. the role of utilising exhaled nitric oxide to tailor the dose of inhaled corticosteroids cannot be routinely recommended for clinical practice at this stage and remains uncertain.
this review demonstrates that nasal mupirocin reduces exit-site/tunnel infection but not peritonitis. preoperative intravenous prophylaxis reduces early peritonitis but not exit-site/tunnel infection. no other antimicrobial interventions have proven efficacy. given the large number of patients on pd and the importance of peritonitis, the lack of adequately powered rcts to inform decision making about strategies to prevent peritonitis is striking.
for patients with obstructive chronic pancreatitis and dilated pancreatic duct, this review showed that surgery is superior to endoscopy in terms of pain control. morbidity and mortality seemed not to differ between the two intervention modalities, but the small trials identified do not provide sufficient power to detect the small differences expected in this outcome. regarding the comparison of surgical intervention versus conservative treatment, this review has shown that surgical intervention in an early stage of chronic pancreatitis seems to be a promising approach in terms of pain control and pancreatic function. confirmation of these results is needed in other trials due to the methodological limitations and limited number of patients of the present evidence.
the available trials are too small to provide evidence for or against the use of air filtration units to reduce allergen levels in the management of pet-allergic asthma. adequately powered trials are needed. there are no trials of other allergen reduction measures, such as pet washing or possibly pet removal.
culturally appropriate diabetes health education appears to have short term effects on glycaemic control and knowledge of diabetes and healthy lifestyles. none of the studies were long-term, and so clinically important long-term outcomes could not be studied. no studies included an economic analysis. the heterogeneity of studies made subgroup comparisons difficult to interpret with confidence. there is a need for long-term, standardised multi-centre rcts that compare different types and intensities of culturally appropriate health education within defined ethnic minority groups.
dactinomycin is more likely to achieve a primary cure in women with low-risk gtn, and less likely to result in treatment failure, compared with methotrexate. there is limited evidence relating to side-effects, however, the pulsed dactinomycin regimen does not appear to be associated with significantly more side-effects than the low-dose methotrexate regimen and therefore should compare favourably to the five- and eight-day methotrexate regimens in this regard. we consider pulsed dactinomycin to have a better cure rate than, and a side-effect profile at least equivalent to, methotrexate when used for first-line treatment of low-risk gtn. data from a large ongoing trial of pulsed dactinomycin compared with five- and eight-day methotrexate regimens is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in these findings.
there is some evidence that the use of topical fluoride or fluoride-containing bonding materials during orthodontic treatment reduces the occurrence and severity of white spot lesions, however there is little evidence as to which method or combination of methods to deliver the fluoride is the most effective. based on current best practice in other areas of dentistry, for which there is evidence, we recommend that patients with fixed braces rinse daily with a 0.05% sodium fluoride mouthrinse. more high quality, clinical research is required into the different modes of delivering fluoride to the orthodontic patient.
auranofin appears to have a small clinically and statistically significant benefit on the disease activity of patients with ra. the beneficial effects appear to be modest compared to drugs such as methotrexate or parenteral gold. its effects on long term health status and radiological progression are not clear at this time.
results from the single trial indicate no evidence of a beneficial effect of optic nerve decompression surgery for naion. future research should focus on increasing our understanding of the etiology and prognosis of naion. new treatment options should be examined in the context of randomized clinical trials.
the overall results of this review are compatible both with modest benefit and moderate harm of haemodilution therapy for acute ischaemic stroke. this therapy has not been proven to improve survival or functional outcome.
budesonide is effective for inducing and maintaining clinical and histological response in patients with collagenous colitis. the evidence for benefit with bismuth subsalicylate and for mesalamine with or without cholestyramine is weak. there is no evidence for the effectiveness of boswellia serrata extract, prednisolone, or probiotics. these agents and other therapies require further study.
we found no clear differences in life table pregnancy rates between women using lam and being supported in doing so, and fully breastfeeding amenorrheic women not using any method. because the length of lactation amenorrhea in women using lam was very different between the populations studied, and is population specific, it is uncertain whether the lam extends lactational amenorrhea.
there is no evidence to support the routine use of progestogen to prevent miscarriage in early to mid-pregnancy. however, there seems to be evidence of benefit in women with a history of recurrent miscarriage. treatment for these women may be warranted given the reduced rates of miscarriage in the treatment group and the finding of no statistically significant difference between treatment and control groups in rates of adverse effects suffered by either mother or baby in the available evidence. larger trials are currently underway to inform treatment for this group of women.
from these limited data there is no evidence of benefit or disadvantage of tubal surgery versus no treatment or alternative treatments. likewise there is no evidence of advantage or disadvantage of using microsurgery over standard techniques; laparoscopic approach over laparotomy; the use of co2 laser; or electrocoagulation over thermocoagulation. randomised controlled trials should be undertaken to determine the role of tubal surgery versus no treatment or alternative treatments. randomised controlled trials should be undertaken to determine the role at tubal surgery of magnification, laparoscopic approach, the use of lasers or electrocoagulation.
on the basis of moderate quality evidence from one trial in diabetic peripheral neuropathy, oxcarbazepine is effective in reducing pain for this condition. however, this conclusion does not take into account negative results from other trials in diabetic peripheral neuropathy that could not be included in our meta-analysis. we did not find any evidence from randomised controlled trials to determine the efficacy or safety of oxcarbazepine for other kinds of neuropathic pain. most adverse effects related to oxcarbazepine are rated as mild to moderate in severity, but adverse events leading to discontinuation of drug administration or serious adverse events are not uncommon. more well designed randomised controlled trials investigating oxcarbazepine for various types of neuropathic pain are needed.
on the basis of the current review, there is scant evidence to guide clinicians about how gastrointestinal or liver comorbidities should influence the choice of pain treatment in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis or other spondyloarthritis. based upon additional studies that included a mixed population of participants with a range of rheumatic conditions, nsaids should be used cautiously in patients with inflammatory arthritis and a history of gastrointestinai comorbidity as there is consistent evidence that they may be at increased risk.
there is not enough evidence to support the administration of furosemide to premature infants treated with indomethacin for symptomatic patent ductus arteriosus. furosemide appears to be contraindicated in the presence of dehydration in those infants.
the analyses did not support the use of melatonin for treatment of cognitive impairment associated with dementia. meta-analysis of psychopathologic behavior scale scores suggested that melatonin may be effective in treating these dementia-related disturbances.
currently available clinical trial evidence suggests rfa and evlt are at least as effective as surgery in the treatment of great saphenous varicose veins. there are insufficient data to comment on usgfs. further randomised trials are needed. we should aim to report and analyse results in a congruent manner to facilitate future meta-analysis.
very little evidence exists that there is no difference in the effectiveness between different types of interventions and that brief interventions are not superior to assessment only or treatment as usual. no conclusion can be made because of the paucity of the data and the low quality of the retrieved studies.
no statistically significant differences were observed in clinical cure rates of anti-fungals administered by the oral and intra-vaginal routes for the treatment of uncomplicated vaginal candidiasis. no definitive conclusion can be made regarding the relative safety of oral and intra-vaginal anti-fungals for uncomplicated vaginal candidiasis. the decision to prescribe or recommend the purchase of an anti-fungal for oral or intra-vaginal administration should take into consideration: safety, cost and treatment preference. unless there is a previous history of adverse reaction to one route of administration or contraindications, women who are purchasing their own treatment should be given full information about the characteristics and costs of treatment to make their own decision. if health services are paying the treatment cost, decision-makers should consider whether the higher cost of some oral anti-fungals is worth the gain in convenience, if this is the patient's preference.
data from one trial suggests that mln-02 may be effective for induction of clinical response and remission in patients with moderately severe ulcerative colitis. adverse events appear to be similar to placebo, although immunogenicity may be an issue. further trials are needed to confirm the results of this study and to define the optimal dose and frequency of administration of mln-02.
there is some evidence that eibi is an effective behavioral treatment for some children with asd. however, the current state of the evidence is limited because of the reliance on data from non-randomized studies (ccts) due to the lack of rcts. additional studies using rct research designs are needed to make stronger conclusions about the effects of eibi for children with asd.
buprenorphine is an effective intervention for use in the maintenance treatment of heroin dependence, but it is less effective than methadone delivererd at adequate dosages.
there is insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of interventions for the cough in whooping cough.
current evidence does not support the use of intranasal corticosteroids for symptomatic relief from the common cold. however, there were only two trials and limited statistical power. further large randomised placebo-controlled trials in adults and children are required to answer this question.
no convincing evidence that vitamin e is of benefit in the treatment of ad or mci. future trials assessing vitamin e treatment in ad should not be restricted to alpha-tocopherol.
intraperitoneal chemotherapy increases overall survival and progression-free survival from advanced ovarian cancer. the results of this meta-analysis provide the most reliable estimates of the relative survival benefits of ip over iv therapy and should be used as part of the decision making process. however, the potential for catheter related complications and toxicity needs to be considered when deciding on the most appropriate treatment for each individual woman. the optimal dose, timing and mechanism of administration cannot be addressed from this meta-analysis. this needs to be addressed in the next phase of clinical trials.
there is insufficient evidence to show that the addition of misoprostol is superior to the combination of oxytocin and ergometrine alone for the treatment of primary pph. large multi-centre, double-blind, randomised controlled trials are required to identify the best drug combinations, route, and dose of uterotonics for the treatment of primary pph. further work is required to assess the best way of managing women who fail to respond to uterotonics therapy.
a considerable amount of evidence on the effectiveness of amantadine has accrued from non-controlled trials, often in patients with parkinsonian conditions other than idiopathic parkinson's disease. however, rigorous analysis of the six randomised controlled trials of amantadine reveals insufficient evidence of its efficacy and safety in the treatment of idiopathic parkinson's disease.
given current evidence, methylxanthines should not be used for copd exacerbations. possible beneficial effects in lung function and clinical endpoints were modest and inconsistent, whereas adverse effects were significantly increased. more selective agents, tested in larger randomised trials, are necessary if methylxanthines are to have any role in the treatment of copd exacerbations.
there is no conclusive evidence of benefit in terms of recovery to normal visual acuity, visual field or contrast sensitivity with either intravenous or oral corticosteroids at the doses evaluated in trials included in this review.
taking into account women's preferences that favoured administration of prostaglandins in the morning, we conclude that caregivers should preferably consider administering prostaglandins in the morning. there is no strong evidence that induction of labour with intravenous oxytocin in the evening is more or less effective than induction in the morning. consideration may be given to start induction of labour with oxytocin in the evening when indicated.
vitamin a shows benefits in reduction of mortality in hiv-infected children. the effect of vitamin a on children with hiv exposure is not clear and needs further review. zinc and combination vitamin a, zinc and micronutrient supplementation did not show an effect compared to vitamin a alone in children with hiv infection. cotrimoxazole reduced mortality and some morbidity in children with hiv infection. further research may clarify the effects of these interventions on morbidity from diarrhoea and in the population of children with hiv exposure.
mouthrinses containing antibacterial agents such as chlorhexidine and cetylpyridinium chloride may play an important role in reducing the levels of halitosis-producing bacteria on the tongue, and chlorine dioxide and zinc containing mouthrinses can be effective in neutralisation of odouriferous sulphur compounds.well designed randomised controlled trials with a larger sample size, a longer intervention and follow-up period are still needed.
single inhaler therapy has now been demonstrated to reduce exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids against current best practice strategies and against a fixed higher dose of inhaled steroids. the strength of evidence that sit reduces hospitalisation against these same treatments is weak. there were more discontinuations due to adverse events on sit compared to current best practice, but no significant differences in serious adverse events. our confidence in these conclusions is limited by the open-label design of the trials, and by the unknown adherence to treatment in the current best practice arms of the trials. single inhaler therapy can reduce the risk of asthma exacerbations needing oral corticosteroids in comparison with fixed dose maintenance ics and separate relief medication. the reduced odds of exacerbations with sit compared with higher dose ics should be viewed in the context of the possible impact of laba withdrawal during study run-in. this may have made the study populations more likely to respond to sit. single inhaler therapy is not currently licensed for children under 18 years of age in the united kingdom and there is currently very little research evidence for this approach in children or adolescents.
available data from two placebo-controlled trials and one no-treatment controlled trial provides "silver" level evidence (www.cochranemsk.org) that oral steroids provides significant short-term benefits in pain, range of movement of the shoulder and function in adhesive capsulitis but the effect may not be maintained beyond six weeks.
despite the high incidence and burden of disease associated with this condition, there is a paucity of good quality trials assessing clinical maternal and neonatal effects of iron administration in women with anaemia. daily oral iron treatment improves haematological indices but causes frequent gastrointestinal adverse effects. parenteral (intramuscular and intravenous) iron enhances haematological response, compared with oral iron, but there are concerns about possible important adverse effects (for intravenous treatment venous thrombosis and allergic reactions and for intramuscular treatment important pain, discolouration and allergic reactions). large, good quality trials, assessing clinical outcomes (including adverse effects) as well as the effects of treatment by severity of anaemia are required.
the evidence available shows a small benefit for the use of prolonged antibiotics in the treatment of bronchiectasis. this review is limited by the diversity of the trials. further randomised controlled trials with adequate power and standardised end points are required.
in children with persistent asthma, the addition of laba to ics was not associated with a significant reduction in the rate of exacerbations requiring systemic steroids, but was superior for improving lung function compared to the same dose of ics. similarly, compared to a double dose ics, the combination of laba and ics did not significantly increase the risk of exacerbations requiring oral steroids, but was associated with a significantly greater improvement in pef and growth. the possibility of an increased risk of rescue oral steroids and hospital admission with laba therapy needs to be further examined.
there is evidence of short-term benefit from using sapropterin in some patients with sapropterin-responsive forms of phenylketonuria; blood phenylalanine concentration is lowered and protein tolerance increased. there are no serious adverse events associated with using sapropterin in the short term. there is no evidence on the long-term effects of sapropterin and no clear evidence of effectiveness in severe phenylketonuria.
implications for practice thrombolysis should be reserved for patients with limb threatening ischaemia, due to the high risk of haemorrhage or death. greater benefit is seen when the thrombolytic agent is delivered into the thrombus. systemic intravenous thrombolysis is less effective than intra-arterial thrombolysis and is associated with an increase in bleeding complications. 'high dose' and 'forced infusion' techniques, or adjunctive agents such as platelet glycoprotein iib/iiia inhibitors may speed up thrombolysis, but these are not accompanied by lower amputation rates or a decreased need for adjunctive endovascular or surgical procedures. 'low dose continuous infusion', following initial lacing of the thrombus with a high dose of the thrombolytic agent, is the least labour intensive technique. implications for research only large multicentre trials with carefully controlled inclusion criteria will be sufficiently powerful to demonstrate genuine benefit for a particular thrombolytic regime.
cognitive therapy, behavioural therapy, cognitive behavioural therapy and behavioural stress management are effective in reducing symptoms of hypochondriasis. however, studies included in the review used small numbers of participants and do not allow estimation of effect size, comparison between different types of psychotherapy or whether people are "cured". most long-term outcome data were uncontrolled. further studies should make use of validated rating scales, assess treatment acceptability and effect on resource use, and determine the active ingredients and nonspecific factors that are important in psychotherapy for hypochondriasis.
implementation of guidelines with mandatory second opinion can lead to a small reduction in caesarean section rates, predominately in intrapartum sections. peer review, including pre-caesarean consultation, mandatory secondary opinion and postcaesarean surveillance can lead to a reduction in repeat caesarean section rates. guidelines disseminated with endorsement and support from local opinion leaders may increase the proportion of women with previous caesarean sections being offered a trial of labour in certain settings. nurse-led relaxation classes and birth preparation classes may reduce caesarean section rates in low-risk pregnancies.
this update has demonstrated that whilst assisted hatching (ah) does appear to offer a significantly increased chance of achieving a clinical pregnancy, the extent to which it may do so only just reaches statistical significance. the 'take home' baby rate was still not proven to be increased by ah. the included trials provided insufficient data to investigate the impact of ah on several important outcomes. most trials still failed to report on live birth rates.
cyclophosphamide appears to have a clinically and statistically significant benefit on the disease activity of patients with ra, similar to some disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (dmards) such as antimalarials or sulfasalazine, but lower than methotrexate. toxicity however is severe, limiting its use given the low benefit-risk ratio compared to other antirheumatic agents.
the neuroprotective role for antenatal magnesium sulphate therapy given to women at risk of preterm birth for the preterm fetus is now established. the number of women needed to be treated to benefit one baby by avoiding cerebral palsy is 63 (95% confidence interval 43 to 155). given the beneficial effects of magnesium sulphate on substantial gross motor function in early childhood, outcomes later in childhood should be evaluated to determine the presence or absence of later potentially important neurological effects, particularly on motor or cognitive function.
the present review summarises the best evidence available to date. although there were some small beneficial findings in favour of anticholinergic therapy, there is insufficient data to support the use of anticholinergic drugs in the maintenance treatment of chronic asthma in children.
vaccines against pseudomonas aeruginosa cannot be recommended.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials to determine whether replacement arthroplasty has any advantage over internal fixation for extracapsular hip fractures. further larger well-designed randomised trials comparing arthroplasty versus internal fixation for the treatment of unstable fractures are required.
current evidence suggests that the addition of heliox therapy may significantly reduce a clinical score evaluating respiratory distress in the first hour after starting treatment in infants with acute rsv bronchiolitis. nevertheless, there was no reduction in the rate of intubation, in the need for mechanical ventilation, or in the length of picu stay. further studies with homogeneous logistics in their heliox application are needed. such studies would provide necessary information as to the appropriate place for heliox in the therapeutic schedule for severe bronchiolitis.
placement of retroperitoneal tube drains has no benefit in prevention of lymphocyst formation after pelvic lymphadenectomy in patients with gynaecological malignancies. when the pelvic peritoneum is left open, the tube drain placement is associated with a higher risk of short and long-term symptomatic lymphocyst formation.
based on a qualitative review of the available data we conclude that in the treatment of early parkinson's disease, bromocriptine may be beneficial in delaying motor complications and dyskinesias with comparable effects on impairment and disability in those patients that tolerate the drug.
there was no evidence of a significant difference in rates of clinical pregnancy, live birth or miscarriage in women with clomiphene-resistant pcos undergoing lod compared to other medical treatments. the reduction in multiple pregnancy rates in women undergoing lod makes this option attractive. however, there are ongoing concerns about the long-term effects of lod on ovarian function.
no benefit of survival or clinical efficacy was shown with empirical atypical coverage in hospitalized patients with cap. this conclusion relates mostly to the comparison of quinolone monotherapy to beta-lactams. further trials, comparing beta-lactam monotherapy to the same combined with a macrolide, should be performed.
current evidence from randomised controlled trials does not support the use of dopamine agonists for treating cocaine dependence. this absence of evidence may leave to clinicians the alternative of balancing the possible benefits against the potential adverse effects of the treatment.even the potential benefit of combining a dopamine agonist with a more potent psychosocial intervention which was suggested by the previous cochrane review (soares 2003), is not supported by the results of this updated review.
chinese herbal medicines, given in a western biomedical context, may be beneficial for people with schizophrenia when combined with antipsychotics. traditional chinese medicine is also under-evaluated, but results from one pioneering study that attempted to evaluate tcm should encourage further trials. note: the 45 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
hepatitis a vaccines are effective for pre-exposure prophylaxis of hepatitis a in susceptible individuals. this review demonstrated significant protection for at least two years with the inactivated hav vaccine and at least five years with the live attenuated hav vaccine. there was evidence to support the safety of the inactivated hepatitis a vaccine. more high quality evidence is required to determine the safety of live attenuated vaccines.
for the effect of enalapril in childhood cancer survivors with asymptomatic cardiac dysfunction, only one rct is available. although there is some evidence that enalapril temporarily improves one parameter of cardiac function (lvesws), it is unclear whether it improves clinical outcomes. enalapril was associated with a higher risk of dizziness or hypotension and fatigue. clinicians should weigh the possible benefits with the known side-effects of enalapril in childhood cancer survivors with asymptomatic anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity. for the effect of phosphocreatine in childhood cancer patients with anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity, only one rct is available. limited data with a high risk of bias showed no significant difference between phosphocreatine and control treatment on echocardiographic function and clinical outcomes. we did not identify any rcts or ccts studying other medical interventions for symptomatic or asymptomatic cardiotoxicity in childhood cancer patients or survivors. high-quality studies should be performed.
evidence from nine small studies of moderate methodological quality, suggests that pulmonary rehabilitation is a highly effective and safe intervention to reduce hospital admissions and mortality and to improve health-related quality of life in copd patients who have recently suffered an exacerbation of copd.
the results of a single trial provide limited evidence to support the effectiveness of intratympanic steroids in patients with ménière's disease. this trial demonstrated a statistically and clinically significant improvement of the frequency and severity of vertigo measured 24 months after the treatment was administered. it is important to note that there were a few aspects of the study which we were unable to clarify with the study authors.
no clear practice recommendations can be drawn from the results of this review on this clinically important question, related to a paucity of reliable data. further well-designed randomised controlled trials are needed to assess the effects of routine use of maternal antibiotics for women with prelabour rupture of the membranes at or near term.
anakinra is a relatively safe and modestly efficacious biologic therapy for rheumatoid arthritis. although head to head comparison trials have not been carried out, the amount of improvement is notably less when compared to studies using other biologic therapies. more studies are needed to evaluate safety and efficacy, especially in comparison to other therapies, and adverse event data for the long-term use of anakinra has yet to be assessed.
surgery, especially hysterectomy, reduces menstrual bleeding more than medical treatments at one year but lng-ius may be comparable in improving quality of life. the evidence for longer-term comparisons is weak and inconsistent. oral medication suits a minority of women long term.
we found evidence to support the effectiveness of patient support and education interventions intended to improve adherence to antiretroviral therapy. interventions targeting practical medication management skills, those interventions administered to individuals vs groups, and those interventions delivered over 12 weeks or more were associated with improved adherence outcomes. there is a need for standardization and increased methodological rigour in the conduct of adherence trials.
various cst courses appear to be effective in improving some types of hcp communication skills related to information gathering and supportive skills. we were unable to determine whether the effects of cst are sustained over time, whether consolidation sessions are necessary, and which types of cst programs are most likely to work. we found no evidence to support a beneficial effect of cst on hcp 'burnout', patients' mental or physical health, and patient satisfaction.
in patients with ra, rofecoxib demonstrates a greater degree of efficacy than placebo, while having a comparable safety profile. rofecoxib demonstrates a similar degree of efficacy as naproxen, but with a significantly lower rate of ulceration and gastrointestinal bleeding. rofecoxib was associated with a greater risk for mi, but the exact significance and pathophysiology of this possible relationship is unclear. rofecoxib was voluntarily withdrawn from global markets in october 2004. it cannot therefore be prescribed and therefore there are no implications for practice concerning its use. none the less when considering which nsaid to use, it must be borne in mind that the toxicity of nsaids is variable amongst patients and drugs and it tends to be dose related and associated with variation in the mode of action, absorption, distribution and metabolism.there remains a number of questions over both the benefits and risks associated with cox ii selective agents and further work is ongoing. it is likely that this issue will not be resolved until research has enabled a fuller understanding of the complex mechanism by which the cox system operates.
the evidence from this new review supports the continued use of a single course of antenatal corticosteroids to accelerate fetal lung maturation in women at risk of preterm birth. a single course of antenatal corticosteroids should be considered routine for preterm delivery with few exceptions. further information is required concerning optimal dose to delivery interval, optimal corticosteroid to use, effects in multiple pregnancies, and to confirm the long-term effects into adulthood. [note: the 16 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is evidence that intravenous prostacyclin in addition to conventional therapy at tolerable doses optimised by titration, can confer some short-term benefits (up to 12 weeks of treatment) in exercise capacity, nyha functional class and cardiopulmonary haemodynamics. there is also some evidence that patients with more severe disease based upon nyha functional class showed a greater response to treatment.
cimt is a multifaceted intervention: the restriction to the normal limb is accompanied by a certain amount of exercise of the appropriate quality. it is associated with a moderate reduction in disability assessed at the end of the treatment period. however, for disability measured some months after the end of treatment, there was no evidence of persisting benefit. further randomised trials, with larger sample sizes and longer follow up, are justified.
field entomological studies confirm that emrs have no effect on preventing mosquito bites. therefore there is no justification for marketing them to prevent malaria infection.
there is no clear evidence that elective hfov offers important advantages over cv when used as the initial ventilation strategy to treat preterm infants with acute pulmonary dysfunction. there may be a small reduction in the rate of cld with hfov use, but the evidence is weakened by the inconsistency of this effect across trials and the overall borderline significance. future trials on elective hfov should target those infants who are at most risk of cld (extremely preterm infants), compare different strategies for generating hfov and cv, and report important long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes.
despite the significant effect noted in the studies, we concluded that there are not enough data to evaluate the effect of vaccination on coronary heart disease.
there is evidence that aerobic physical activities which improve cardiorespiratory fitness are beneficial for cognitive function in healthy older adults, with effects observed for motor function, cognitive speed, auditory and visual attention. however, the majority of comparisons yielded no significant results. the data are insufficient to show that the improvements in cognitive function which can be attributed to physical exercise are due to improvements in cardiovascular fitness, although the temporal association suggests that this might be the case. larger studies are still required to confirm whether the aerobic training component is necessary, or whether the same can be achieved with any type of physical exercise. at the same time, it would be informative to understand why some cognitive functions seem to improve with (aerobic) physical exercise while other functions seem to be insensitive to physical exercise. clinicians and scientists in the field of neuropsychology should seek mutual agreement on a smaller battery of cognitive tests to use, in order to render research on cognition clinically relevant and transparent and heighten the reproducibility of results for future research.
there is little evidence on the effects of pre-pregnancy health promotion and much more research is needed in this area. there is currently insufficient evidence to recommend the widespread implementation of routine pre-pregnancy health promotion for women of childbearing age, either in the general population or between pregnancies.
there is no reliable evidence that bradykinin beta-2 receptor antagonists are safe or effective for use in tbi patients, and they should not be used outside the context of well conducted trials. further adequately powered and well conducted randomised controlled trials are required.
this review shows a trend towards better outcome in patients treated with antiplatelet agents, possibly due to a reduction in secondary ischaemia. however, results were not statistically significant, thus no definite conclusions can be drawn. also, antiplatelet agents could increase the risk of haemorrhagic complications. on the basis of the current evidence treatment with antiplatelet agents in order to prevent secondary ischaemia or poor outcome cannot be recommended.
infliximab, golimumab, srt, grenz rays, and electron beam caused significant nail improvement compared to the comparative treatment. although the quality of trials was generally poor, this review may have some implications for clinical practice. although powerful systemic treatments have been shown to be beneficial, they may have serious adverse effects. so they are not a realistic option for people troubled with nail psoriasis, unless the patient is prescribed these systemic treatments because of cutaneous psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis or the nail psoriasis is severe, refractory to other treatments, or has a major impact on the person's quality of life. because of their design and timescale, rcts generally do not pick up serious side-effects. this review reported only mild adverse effects, recorded mainly for systemic treatments. radiotherapy for psoriasis is not used in common practice. the evidence for the use of topical treatments is inconclusive and of poor quality; however, this does not imply that they do not work. future trials need to be rigorous in design, with adequate reporting. trials should correctly describe the participants' characteristics and diagnostic features, use standard validated nail scores and participant-reported outcomes, be long enough to report efficacy and safety, and include details of effects on nail features.
there are no demonstrated clinically relevant differences in outcomes between the use of pvc catheters and other materials. therefore, other considerations such as price and ease of availability may dictate the catheter chosen. an adequately powered randomized comparison of silastic to pvc should be performed.
the results of the present review suggest that exercise therapy can be beneficial for patients with ms not experiencing an exacerbation. there is an urgent need for consensus on a core set of outcome measures to be used in exercise trials. in addition, these studies should experimentally control for 'dose' of treatment, type of ms and should include sufficient contrast between experimental and control groups.
early treatment of early stage multiple myeloma inhibits disease progression, and may reduce vertebral compression. however, early treatment may increase the risk of acute leukemia. however, the data on vertebral compression and leukemic transformation may not be interpretable due to very small numbers. based on the current evidence, mortality and response rate are not significantly affected by introducing early treatment in the progression of myeloma. however, it is quite possible that the lack of beneficial effects of early intervention in myeloma is a false negative result due to the paucity of the existing evidence. in addition, data on quality of life and toxicity were sparsely reported adding to additional difficulties about management decisions in early stage myeloma.
prophylactic surgical ligation of the pda did not decrease mortality or bpd in elbw infants. a significant reduction of stage ii or iii nec was noted. based on the current evidence, the high rate of spontaneous closure, availability of effective safe medical therapies, and the potential short and long-term complications of surgical ligation, the use such prophylactic surgical therapy is not indicated in the management of the preterm infants.
nsaid rectal suppositories are associated with less pain up to 24 hours after birth, and less additional analgesia is required. more research is required regarding long-term effects and maternal satisfaction with the treatment.
no differences were identified among the different doses of corticosteroids in acute asthma requiring hospital admission. low dose corticosteroids (< or = 80 mg/day of methylprednisolone or < or = 400 mg/day of hydrocortisone) appear to be adequate in the initial management of these adult patients. higher doses do not appear to offer a therapeutic advantage.
currently, there is inconclusive evidence from rcts to support or refute the generalised use of granulocyte transfusion therapy in the most common neutropenic patient populations, that is caused by myeloablative chemotherapy with or without haematopoietic stem cell support. contemporary well designed prospective trials are required to evaluate the efficacy of this intervention in these patient populations and to establish definitively whether it has clinical benefit. in such studies, average numbers of collected granulocytes for adults should be (at least) greater than 1x1010.
there are insufficient data to draw any firm conclusions. treatment with bromocriptine appears promising, although women would be unable to breastfeed due to suppression of lactation.
there are no other studies from other countries other than india and nepal and there are insufficient data on cost-effectiveness of each procedure. better evidence is needed before any change may be implemented. future studies need to have longer-term follow-up and be conducted to minimize biases revealed in this review with a larger sample size to allow examination of adverse events.
this review provides some evidence that mhws working in primary care to deliver psychological therapy and psychosocial interventions cause a significant reduction in pcp behaviours such as consultations, prescribing, and referrals to specialist care. however, the changes are modest in magnitude, inconsistent, do not generalise to the wider patient population, and their clinical or economic significance is unclear.
this improvement in survival encourages the use of platinum based combination chemotherapy for patients with invasive bladder cancer.
overall, there was no clear evidence that administration of peri-implantation glucocorticoids in art cycles significantly improved the clinical outcome. the use of glucocorticoids in a subgroup of women undergoing ivf (rather than icsi) was associated with an improvement in pregnancy rates of borderline statistical significance and should be interpreted with care. these findings were limited to the routine use of glucocorticoids and cannot be extrapolated to women with autoantibodies, unexplained infertility or recurrent implantation failure. further well designed randomised studies are required to elucidate the possible role of this therapy in well defined patient groups.
the results of this review are inconclusive, and should not be interpreted as a reason to change current practice. due to the limitations of the included trials, more trials with sufficient numbers of women are needed in order to estimate the effects of sustained uterine massage. all the women compared in this review received oxytocin as part of the active management of labour. recent research suggests that once an oxytocic has been given, there is limited scope for further reduction in postpartum blood loss. trials of uterine massage in settings where uterotonics are not available, and which measure women's experience of the procedure, are needed.
we found no significant differences in clinical or microbiological efficacy between quinolones but some differences in occurrence and spectrum of quinolone safety.
the evidence is inconclusive to allow us to make any recommendations for massage therapy or depression-specific acupuncture for the treatment of antenatal depression. the included trial was too small with a non-generalisable sample, to make any recommendations. [note: the eleven citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
on the basis of one small randomised trial that did not describe sequence generation, allocation concealment or blinding, it can be concluded that in patients with liver metastases no significant survival benefit or benefit on extrahepatic recurrence was found in the embolisation group in comparison with the palliation group. the probability for selective outcome reporting bias in the trial is high. at present, transarterial (chemo)embolisation cannot be recommended outside randomised clinical trials.
atovaquone-proguanil and doxycycline are the best tolerated regimens, and mefloquine is associated with adverse neuropsychiatric outcomes.
icm was found effective in ameliorating many outcomes relevant to people with severe mental illnesses. compared to standard care icm was shown to reduce hospitalisation and increase retention in care. it also globally improved social functioning, although icm's effect on mental state and quality of life remains unclear. icm is of value at least to people with severe mental illnesses who are in the sub-group of those with a high level of hospitalisation (about 4 days/month in past 2 years) and the intervention should be performed close to the original model. it is not clear, however, what gain icm provides on top of a less formal non-icm approach. we do not think that more trials comparing current icm with standard care or non-icm are justified, but currently we know of no review comparing non-icm with standard care and this should be undertaken.
this review indicates that artificial support systems may reduce mortality in acute-on-chronic liver failure. artificial and bioartificial support systems did not appear to affect mortality in acute liver failure. however, considering the strength of the evidence additional randomised clinical trials are needed before any support system can be recommended for routine use.
the best available evidence for decompression of colorectal anastomosis, either use of loop ileostomy or loop colostomy, could not be clarified from this review. so far, the results in terms of occurrence of postoperative stoma prolapse support the choice of loop ileostomy as a technique for fecal diversion for colorectal anastomosis, but large scale rct's is needed to verify this.
the evidence from randomised trials does not show significant benefit from azathioprine, interferon beta-1a or methotrexate but none of the trials was large enough to rule out small or moderate benefit. the evidence from observational studies is insufficient to avoid the need for randomised controlled trials to discover whether these drugs are beneficial. future trials should have improved designs, more sensitive outcome measures and longer durations.
antenatal maternal glucose administration has not been shown to reduce non-reactive cardiotocography. more trials are needed to further substantiate this and to determine not only the optimum dose, but also to evaluate the efficacy, predictive reliability, safety and perinatal outcome of glucose administration in conjunction with cardiotocography and also other tests of fetal wellbeing.
covering stoma seems to be useful to prevent anastomotic leakage and urgent re-operations in patients receiving low anterior resection for rectal cancer. however, covering stoma does not seems to offer advantage in term of 30 days or long term mortality.
there is marked inconsistency in the results of the studies included in this systematic review. while the frequency of injury in some study communities did reduce following their designation as a who safe community, there remains insufficient evidence from which to draw definitive conclusions regarding the effectiveness of the model. the lack of consistency in results may be due to the heterogeneity of the approaches to implementing the model, varying efficacy of activities and strategies, varying intensity of implementation and methodological limitations in evaluations. while all communities included in the review fulfilled the who safe community criteria, these criteria were too general to prescribe a standardised programme of activity or evaluation methodology. adequate documentation describing how various safe communities implemented the model was limited, making it unclear which factors affected success. where a reduction in injury rates was not reported, lack of information makes it difficult to distinguish whether this was due to problems with the model or with the way in which it was implemented.
the results justify further evaluation of bisphosphonates among children with secondary osteoporosis. however, the evidence does not support bisphosphonates as standard therapy. short-term (3 years or less) bisphosphonate use appears to be well-tolerated. an accepted criterion for osteoporosis in children, a standardized approach to bmd reporting, and examining functional bone health outcomes (e.g., fracture rates) will allow for appropriate comparisons across studies.
cup feeding cannot be recommended over bottle feeding as a supplement to breastfeeding because it confers no significant benefit in maintaining breastfeeding beyond hospital discharge and carries the unacceptable consequence of a longer stay in hospital.
no intervention proved to have a consistent symptomatic control in hd. tetrabenazine is the anti-choreic drug with the best quality data available. other symptomatic areas should be explored by well-designed randomised placebo-controlled studies.
there was insufficient evidence to determine if screening for gestational diabetes, or what types of screening, can improve maternal and infant health outcomes.
this review found two trials which showed that topical nsaid (0.5% ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution) has a positive effect on chronic cmo and two trials which revealed no significant difference between comparative groups. as such, the effects of nsaids in acute and chronic cmo remain unclear and needs further investigation.
non-legislative interventions appear to be effective in increasing observed helmet use, particularly community-based interventions and those providing free helmets. those set in schools appear to be effective but possibly less so than community-based interventions. interventions providing education only are less effective than those providing free helmets. there is insufficient evidence to recommend providing subsidised helmets at present. interventions may be more effective if provided to younger rather than older children. there is evidence that interventions offered in healthcare settings can increase self reported helmet wearing. further high-quality studies are needed to explore whether non-legislative interventions increase helmet wearing, and particularly the effect of providing subsided as opposed to free helmets, and of providing interventions in healthcare settings as opposed to in schools or communities. alternative interventions (e.g. those including peer educators, those aimed at developing safety skills including skills in decision making and resisting peer pressure or those aimed at improving self esteem or self efficacy) need developing and testing, particularly for 11 to 18 year olds. the effect of interventions in countries with existing cycle helmet legislation and in low and middle-income countries also requires investigation.
home visits and health education may improve immunization coverage but the quality of evidence is low.
the review suggests that there is little evidence to support or refute social skills training for adolescents with adhd. there is need for more trials, with low risk of bias and with a sufficient number of participants, investigating the efficacy of social skills training versus no training for both children and adolescents.
the evidence suggests that terbinafine is more effective than griseofulvin, and terbinafine and itraconazole are more effective than no treatment. in order to produce more reliable data, a rigorous evaluation of different drug therapies needs to be undertaken with larger sample sizes to ensure they are large enough to show any real difference when two treatments are being compared. it is also important to continue to follow up and collect data, preferably for six months after the end of the intervention period, to establish whether or not the infection recurred.
cryotherapy offers a potential alternative to standard therapies for the primary treatment of localised prostate cancer. however, the poor quality of the available studies makes it difficult to determine the relative benefits of this modality. randomised trials are needed to fully evaluate the full potential of cryotherapy in men with this disease. patients selecting cryotherapy as their therapeutic option should be made fully aware of the reported efficacy, complications and the low-grade evidence from which these data are derived.
at present, there is no evidence to suggest that covering surgical wounds healing by primary intention with wound dressings reduces the risk of ssi or that any particular wound dressing is more effective than others in reducing the rates of ssi, improving scarring, pain control, patient acceptability or ease of dressing removal. most trials in this review were small and of poor quality at high or unclear risk of bias. however, based on the current evidence, we conclude that decisions on wound dressing should be based on dressing costs and the symptom management properties offered by each dressing type e.g. exudate management.
there is little to choose between peribulbar and retrobulbar block in terms of anaesthesia and akinesia during surgery measuring acceptability to patients, need for additional injections and development of severe complications. severe local or systemic complications were rare for both types of block.
research has focussed on encouraging women to attempt vaginal delivery. trials of interventions to encourage women to attempt vaginal birth showed no effect, but shortcomings in study design mean that the evidence is inconclusive. further research on this topic is urgently needed.
ondansetron and granisetron appear to be equivalent drugs for the prevention of acute and delayed emesis following the use of highly emetogenic chemotherapy. according to one single trial the combination of palonosetron and dexamethasone was superior to granisetron and dexamethasone in controlling delayed emesis. however, more evidence is needed before palonosetron could become the candidate 5-ht3 ra for the control of delayed emesis induced by highly emetogenic chemotherapy.
limited current evidence is available and it is inconclusive regarding the benefit from parent-initiated ocs in the treatment of intermittent wheezing illnesses in children. widespread use of this strategy cannot be recommended until the benefits and harms can be clarified further.
full financial interventions directed at smokers when compared to no financial interventions increase the proportion of smokers who attempt to quit, use smoking cessation treatments, and succeed in quitting. the absolute differences are small but the costs per additional quitter are low to moderate. we did not detect an effect on smoking cessation from financial incentives directed at healthcare providers. the methodological qualities of the included studies need to be taken into consideration when interpreting the results.
the analgesia use and the pulmonary compromise may be reduced with a transverse/oblique incision but this does not seem to be significant clinically as pulmonary complication rates and recovery times were the same. the likelihood of wound dehiscence and rupture appears to be reduced with a transverse incision and a transverse incision may look better. the methodological and clinical diversity and the potential for bias also mean that the results in favour of a transverse/oblique incision (particularly with regard to analgesic use) should be treated with caution. the optimal incision for abdominal surgery still remains the preference of the surgeon.
we found no evidence from randomised controlled trials for or against early or larger volume of intravenous fluid administration in uncontrolled haemorrhage. there is continuing uncertainty about the best fluid administration strategy in bleeding trauma patients. further randomised controlled trials are needed to establish the most effective fluid resuscitation strategy.
it is uncertain whether medication review reduces mortality or hospital readmissions, but medication review seems to reduce emergency department contacts. however, the cost-effectiveness of this intervention is not known and due to the uncertainty of the estimates of mortality and readmissions and the short follow-up, important treatment effects may have been overlooked. therefore, medication review should preferably be undertaken in the context of clinical trials. high quality trials with long follow-up are needed before medication review should be implemented.
we can conclude no implications for practice at this stage. appropriately designed large-scale randomized controlled trials with long-term follow-up are needed to determine the effects of additional bedtime h2ras in suppressing nocturnal gastric acid breakthrough.
the evidence from trials for the use of benzodiazepines alone is not good. there were relatively little good data and most trials are too small to highlight differences in either positive or negative effects. adding a benzodiazepine to other drugs does not seem to confer clear advantage and has potential for adding unnecessary adverse effects. sole use of older antipsychotics unaccompanied by anticholinergic drugs seems difficult to justify. much more high quality research is needed in this area.
for people with acs, there is some evidence from small trials to suggest that hbot is associated with a reduction in the risk of death, the volume of damaged muscle, the risk of mace and time to relief from ischaemic pain. in view of the modest number of patients, methodological shortcomings and poor reporting, this result should be interpreted cautiously, and an appropriately powered trial of high methodological rigour is justified to define those patients (if any) who can be expected to derive most benefit from hbot. the routine application of hbot to these patients cannot be justified from this review.
tcas, ssris and maois are effective in the treatment of older community patients and inpatients likely to have severe physical illness. at least six weeks of antidepressant treatment is recommended to achieve optimal therapeutic effect. there is little evidence concerning the efficacy of low dose tca treatment. further trials are required before low dose tca treatment is routinely recommended.
our findings support educational interventions applied in the emergency department as a means of reducing subsequent asthma admissions to hospital. whilst the direction of the effect on ed presentations was consistent with the reduction in risk of admission, the results were not definitive.. outcomes were measured on average at 6 months after index ed presentation. the impact of educational intervention in this context on longer term outcomes relating to asthma morbidity is unclear. priorities for additional research in this area include assessment of health-related quality of life, lung function assessment, exploration of the relationship between socio-economic status and asthma morbidity, and better description of the intervention assessed.
we do not know whether antipyretics alter parasite clearance time. whether further trials are worthwhile to investigate this or not would require a judgement of whether this was an important question to resolve using interventional trials.
ppi is not efficacious for cough associated with gord symptoms in very young children (including infants) and should not be used for cough outcomes. there is insufficient data in older children to draw any valid conclusions. in adults, there is insufficient evidence to conclude definitely that gord treatment with ppi is universally beneficial for cough associated with gord. clinicians should be cognisant of the period (natural resolution with time) and placebo effect in studies that utilise cough as an outcome measure. future paediatric and adult studies should be double-blind, randomised controlled and parallel-design, using treatments for at least two months, with validated subjective and objective cough outcomes and include ascertainment of time to respond as well as assessment of acid and/or non-acid reflux.
only a small number of studies and patients were included in the meta-analysis. if taken on their own merit, the findings do not provide strong support for psychotherapeutic treatments in the management of depression in older people. however, the findings do reflect those of a larger meta-analysis that included patients with broader age ranges, suggesting that cbt may be of potential benefit.
our systematic review suggests that the addition of atg during allogeneic hsct significantly reduces the incidence of severe grades (ii to iv) of acute gvhd, whereas the incidence of overall acute gvhd (grades i to iv) was not significantly lowered. this indicates a reduction of the severity but not the incidence of acute gvhd. however, this effect did not lead to a significant improvement of overall survival, which may be due to the severe potential side effects of the consecutively increased immunosuppression. furthermore, future research is needed to clarify the effect of atg on the incidence and severity of chronic gvhd and consequently on all aspects of quality of life. from the currently available data, no recommendation on the general use of atg in allogeneic hsct can be supported. therefore, a careful consideration of the use of atg based on the patient's condition and the risk factors of the transplantation setting should be made.
comparisons and conclusions were difficult to evaluate as treatment interventions and outcome measurements from the seven trials varied considerably. at present therefore no reliable conclusions can be drawn concerning the use of breathing exercises for asthma in clinical practice. however trends for improvement, notably in quality of life measurements, are encouraging and further studies including full descriptions of treatment methods and outcome measurements are required.
sonothrombolysis appears to reduce death or dependency at three months (although cis are quite wide), and increases recanalisation without clear hazard. a larger clinical trial is warranted.
there is some suggestion (but no statistically significant result) of an unfavourable effect of piracetam on early death, but this may have been caused by baseline differences in stroke severity in the trials. there is not enough evidence to assess the effect of piracetam on dependence.
the limited available data suggest that dmpa is a safe contraceptive option for women in ss disease. in addition to providing effective contraception, dmpa may reduce sickle pain crises.
in infants with established respiratory distress, a policy of multiple doses of animal derived surfactant extract resulted in greater improvements regarding oxygenation and ventilatory requirements, a decreased risk of pneumothorax and a trend toward improved survival. in infants at high risk of respiratory distress, a policy of multiple doses of synthetic surfactant resulted in greater improvements regarding oxygenation and ventilatory requirements, a decreased risk of nec and decreased mortality. the ability to give multiple doses of surfactant to infants with ongoing respiratory insufficiency leads to improved clinical outcome and appears to be the most effective treatment policy.
even in the most conservative estimate, the evidence that glucocorticoids given in addition to standard therapy can substantially reduce the rate of erosion progression in rheumatoid arthritis is convincing. there remains concern about potential long-term adverse reactions to glucocorticoid therapy, such as increased cardiovascular risk, and this issue requires further research.
due to a small number of clinical and methodologically diverse trials, little can be concluded from this review. there is little evidence to support or refute the use of acupuncture for shoulder pain although there may be short-term benefit with respect to pain and function. there is a need for further well designed clinical trials.
the current literature does not support or refute the efficacy or effectiveness of continuous or intermittent traction for pain reduction, improved function or global perceived effect when compared to placebo traction, tablet or heat or other conservative treatments in patients with chronic neck disorders. large, well conducted rcts are needed to first determine the efficacy of traction, then the effectiveness, for individuals with neck disorders with radicular symptoms.
there is insufficient information on the use of rescue hfov to make recommendations for practice. the small amount of data that exists suggest that harm might outweigh any benefit. any future use of hfov as rescue therapy for preterm infants with severe rds should be within randomised controlled trials and address important outcomes such as longer term pulmonary and neurological function.
based on this systematic review, the authors found evidence that a combination of psychosocial interventions and pharmacological interventions is superior to no treatment or to psychosocial interventions alone. furthermore we conclude that there is no clear or convincing evidence for the effectiveness of any psychosocial intervention for patients with copd due to lack of a sufficient number of high-quality studies.
in art-eligible pregnant women with hiv infection, art is a safe and effective means of providing maternal virologic suppression, decreasing infant mortality, and reducing mtct. specifically, azt/3tc/nvp, azt/3tc/lpv-r, and azt/3tc/abc have been shown to decrease mtct. more research is needed regarding the use of specific regimens and their maternal and infant side-effect profiles.
there is some evidence that rotation oscillation brushes reduce plaque and gingivitis more than side to side brushes in the short term. this difference is small and it's clinical importance is unclear. further trials of good quality are required to assess the superiority of other modes of action for powered toothbrushes.
it was not possible to determine fully the effectiveness of inhaled bronchodilators in cf as a meta-analysis was not possible. however, short and long-acting beta-2 agonists can be beneficial both in the short and long term in individuals with demonstrable bronchodilator responsiveness or bronchial hyper-responsiveness. as we found no evidence, the use of fenoterol, formoterol or tiotropium in cf cannot be supported.
we have not found evidence that a significant difference exists between carbamazepine and phenytoin for the outcomes examined in this review. confidence intervals are wide and the possibility of important differences existing has not been excluded.
primary surgery lowers iop more than primary medication but is associated with more eye discomfort. one trial suggests that visual field restriction at five years is not significantly different whether initial treatment is medication or trabeculectomy. there is some evidence from two small trials in more severe oag, that initial medication (pilocarpine, now rarely used as first line medication) is associated with more glaucoma progression than surgery. beyond five years, there is no evidence of a difference in the need for cataract surgery according to initial treatment. the clinical and cost-effectiveness of contemporary medication (prostaglandin analogues, alpha2-agonists and topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors) compared with primary surgery is not known. further rcts of current medical treatments compared with surgery are required, particularly for people with severe glaucoma and in black ethnic groups. outcomes should include those reported by patients. economic evaluations are required to inform treatment policy.
current recommendations to prescribe "post-discharge formula" for preterm infants following hospital discharge are not supported by the available evidence. some limited evidence exists that feeding preterm infants following hospital discharge with "preterm formula" (which is generally only available for in-hospital use) may increase growth rates up to 18 months corrected age.
there is no direct evidence that additional glove protection worn by the surgical team reduces surgical site infections in patients, however the review has insufficient power for this outcome. the addition of a second pair of surgical gloves significantly reduces perforations to innermost gloves. triple gloving, knitted outer gloves and glove liners also significantly reduce perforations to the innermost glove. perforation indicator systems results in significantly more innermost glove perforations being detected during surgery.
the efficacy of emergency intubation as currently practised has not been rigorously studied. the skill level of the operator may be key in determining efficacy. in non-traumatic cardiac arrest, it is unlikely that intubation carries the same life saving benefit as early defibrillation and bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr). in trauma and paediatric patients, the current evidence base provides no imperative to extend the practice of prehospital intubation in urban systems. it would be ethical and pertinent to initiate a large, high quality randomised trial comparing the efficacy of competently practised emergency intubation with basic bag-valve-mask manoeuvres (bvm) in urban adult out-of-hospital non-traumatic cardiac arrest.
if no other alternative exists, sole use of intramuscular haloperidol could be life-saving. where additional drugs to offset the adverse effects are available, sole use of haloperidol for the extreme emergency, in situations of coercion, could be considered unethical. addition of the sedating promethazine has support from better-grade evidence from within randomised trials. use of an alternative antipsychotic drug is only partially supported by fragmented and poor-grade evidence. evidence for use of newer generation antipsychotic alternatives is no stronger than that for older drugs. adding a benzodiazepine to haloperidol does not have strong evidence of benefit and carries a risk of additional harm. after six decades of use for emergency rapid tranquillisation, this is still an area in need of good independent trials relevant to real world practice.
there is insufficient evidence to draw reliable conclusions about whether nitric oxide donors and precursors prevent pre-eclampsia or its complications. [note: the 13 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
no reliable conclusions can be drawn at present regarding the efficacy of cannabinoids as a treatment for epilepsy. the dose of 200 to 300 mg daily of cannabidiol was safely administered to small numbers of patients, for generally short periods of time, and so the safety of long term cannabidiol treatment cannot be reliably assessed.
there is strong evidence, from randomised controlled trials, that drugs absorbed or partially absorbed from the gi tract prevent oral candidiasis in patients receiving treatment for cancer. there is also evidence that these drugs are significantly better at preventing oral candidiasis than drugs not absorbed from the gi tract.
limited evidence from two rcts demonstrated that prt is more effective than standard physiotherapy treatment for shoulder dysfunction in patients treated for head and neck cancer, improving pain, disability and range of motion of the shoulder joint, but it does not improve quality of life. however, although statistically significant the measured benefits of the intervention may be small. other exercise regimes were not shown to be effective compared to routine postoperative physiotherapy. further studies which apply other exercise interventions in head and neck cancer patients in the early postoperative and radiotherapy period are needed, with long-term follow-up.
gabapentin has efficacy as an add-on treatment in people with drug-resistant partial epilepsy. however, trials reviewed were of relatively short duration, and provide no evidence for the long-term efficacy of gabapentin. results cannot be extrapolated to monotherapy or people with other epilepsy types.
there appears to be strong evidence that chromoscopy enhances the detection of neoplasia in the colon and rectum. patients with neoplastic polyps, particularly those with multiple polyps, are at increased risk of developing colorectal cancer. such lesions, which presumably would be missed with conventional colonoscopy, could contribute to the interval cancer numbers on any surveillance programme.
nitrous oxide is as efficient and safer than various pain relief methods used during colonoscopy procedures, but further trials are necessary.
although non-significant results, there is no obvious advantage in keeping patients 'nil by mouth' following gastrointestinal surgery, and this review support the notion on early commencement of enteral feeding.
the current evidence shows a benefit of mobile phone-based smoking cessation interventions on long-term outcomes, though results were heterogenous with findings from three of five included studies crossing the line of no effect. the studies included were predominantly of text messaging interventions. more research is required into other forms of mobile phone-based interventions for smoking cessation, other contexts such as low income countries, and cost-effectiveness.
this review could not derive clear evidence from randomised clinical trials for the treatment of patients with chronic hbv following liver transplantation for preventing recurrence of hbv infection. large randomised clinical trials comparing long-term combination treatment to each of the monotherapy alone, including the newer antiviral drugs, are needed.
decentralisation of hiv care aims to improve patient access and retention in care. most data were from good quality cohort studies but confounding between site of treatment and outcomes cannot be excluded. nevertheless, this review found that attrition appears to be lower in partial decentralisation models of treatment, where antiretrovirals were started at hospital and continued in the health centre; with antiretroviral drugs started and continued at health centres, no difference in attrition was detected, but there were fewer patients lost to care. for antiretroviral therapy provided at home by trained volunteers, no difference in outcomes were detected when compared to facility-based care.
there is limited evidence of efficacy for primary care based asthma clinics, and firm conclusions cannot be formed until more good quality trials have been carried out.
budesonide exhibits a significant dose response effect between low and high dose for improvement in fev1 in severe asthma and reduction of exacerbations in moderate to severe asthma. no significant dose dependent improvements in fev1, pefr or symptoms are evident in non-oral steroid treated asthmatics with mild to moderate disease. dose dependent alterations in sensitive measures of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function were evident but the clinical significance of these changes is unclear.
infants who are exclusively breastfed for six months experience less morbidity from gastrointestinal infection than those who are partially breastfed as of three or four months, and no deficits have been demonstrated in growth among infants from either developing or developed countries who are exclusively breastfed for six months or longer. moreover, the mothers of such infants have more prolonged lactational amenorrhea. although infants should still be managed individually so that insufficient growth or other adverse outcomes are not ignored and appropriate interventions are provided, the available evidence demonstrates no apparent risks in recommending, as a general policy, exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life in both developing and developed-country settings.
there is evidence supporting a statistically significant effect of post-epley postural restrictions in comparison to the epley manoeuvre alone. however, it important to note that this statistically significant effect only highlights a small improvement in treatment efficacy. an epley manoeuvre alone is effective in just under 80% of patients with typical bppv. the additional intervention of postural restrictions has a number needed to treat (nnt) of 10. the addition of postural restrictions does not expose the majority of patients to risk of harm, does not pose a major inconvenience, and can be routinely discussed and advised. specific patients who experience discomfort due to wearing a cervical collar and inconvenience in sleeping upright may be treated with the epley manoeuvre alone and still expect to be cured in most instances. there is insufficient evidence to support the routine application of mastoid oscillation during the epley manoeuvre, or additional steps in an 'augmented' epley manoeuvre. neither treatment is associated with adverse outcomes. further studies should employ a rigorous randomisation technique, blinded outcome assessment, a post-treatment dix-hallpike test as an outcome measure and longer-term follow-up of patients.
statistical imprecision in the effect estimates for exacerbations and serious adverse events do not enable us to conclude that either therapy is superior. the uncertainty around the effect estimates justify further trials to provide more definitive conclusions; the overall quality of evidence based on grade recommendations for the three primary outcomes and withdrawals due to serious adverse events was moderate. we rated the quality of evidence for mortality to be low. results for lung function outcomes showed that the drugs were sufficiently similar that further research is unlikely to change the effects. no trials were identified in the under-12s and research in this population is a high priority. evaluation of quality of life is a priority for future research.
overweight or obese people on lgi lost more weight and had more improvement in lipid profiles than those receiving cdiets. body mass, total fat mass, body mass index, total cholesterol and ldl-cholesterol all decreased significantly more in the lgi group. in studies comparing ad libitum lgi diets to conventional restricted energy low-fat diets, participants fared as well or better on th lgi diet, even though they could eat as much as desired. lowering the glycaemic load of the diet appears to be an effective method of promoting weight loss and improving lipid profiles and can be simply incorporated into a person's lifestyle. further research with longer term follow-up will determine whether improvement continues long-term and improves quality of life.
the role of surgery in malignant bowel obstruction needs careful evaluation, using validated outcome measures of symptom control and quality of life scores. further information would include re-obstruction rates together with the morbidity associated with the various surgical procedures. currently, bowel obstruction is managed empirically, and there are marked variations in clinical practice by different units. there needs to be a greater standardisation of management so that comparisons between different series can be made.
currently there is no good evidence to suggest life skills programmes are effective for people with chronic mental illnesses. more robust data are needed from studies that are adequately powered to determine whether life skills training is beneficial for people with chronic mental health problems.
the overall quality of evidence was moderate to low, given that the studies were evenly divided across the evidence quality groups (high, moderate, low, or very low quality). we found limited evidence of weight gain when using pocs. mean gain was less than 2 kg for most studies up to 12 months. weight change for the poc group generally did not differ significantly from that of the comparison group using another contraceptive. two studies that assessed body composition showed that poc users had greater increases in body fat and decreases in lean body mass compared to users of non-hormonal methods. appropriate counseling about typical weight gain may help reduce discontinuation of contraceptives due to perceptions of weight gain.
based on 13 studies, we conclude that there is 'silver' level evidence (www.cochranemsk.org) that valgus hto improves knee function and reduces pain. there is no evidence whether an osteotomy is more effective than conservative treatment and the results so far do not justify a conclusion about effectiveness of specific surgical techniques.
uae appears to have an overall patient satisfaction rate similar to hysterectomy and myomectomy, while offering an advantage with regards to a shorter hospital stay and a quicker return to routine activities. however, uae is associated with a higher rate of minor complications and an increased likelihood of requiring surgical intervention within two to five years of the initial procedure. there is very low level evidence suggesting that myomectomy may be associated with better fertility outcomes than uae, but more research is needed.
implementing restrictions to coverage and reimbursement of selected medications can decrease third-party drug spending without increasing the use of other health services (6 studies). relaxing reimbursement rules for drugs used for secondary prevention can also remove barriers to access. policy design, however, needs to be based on research quantifying the harm and benefit profiles of target and alternative drugs to avoid unwanted health system and health effects. health impact evaluation should be conducted where drugs are not interchangeable. impacts on health equity, relating to the fair and just distribution of health benefits in society (sustainable access to publically financed drug benefits for seniors and low income populations, for example), also require explicit measurement.
all three trials have their limitations and have yet to be replicated, so their results must be viewed with caution. there is a clear need for well-designed, randomised trials of the whole range of physical therapies if the best approach to managing lymphoedema is to be determined.
using corticosteroids to prevent (or treat) stridor after extubation has not proven effective for neonates or children. however, given the consistent trends towards benefit, this intervention does merit further study, particularly for high risk children or neonates. in adults, multiple doses of corticosteroids begun 12-24 hours prior to extubation do appear beneficial for patients with a high likelihood of post extubation stridor.
this systematic review shows a relative scarcity of controlled clinical trials assessing the efficacy of punctal occlusion therapy in dry eye. although the evidence is very limited, the data suggest that silicone plugs can provide symptomatic relief in severe dry eye. moreover, temporary collagen plugs appear similarly effective to silicone plugs on a short-term basis.
there is not enough evidence to show that the administration of ace inhibitors is associated with a reduction of microalbuminuria and proteinuria in people with sickle cell disease, although a potential for this was seen. more long-term studies involving multiple centers and larger cohorts using a randomized-controlled design are warranted, especially among the pediatric age group. detailed reporting of each outcome measure is necessary to allow a clear cut interpretation in a systematic review. one of the difficulties encountered in this review was the lack of detailed data reported in the included study.
a single dose of parecoxib 20 mg or 40 mg provided effective analgesia for 50 to 60% of those treated compared to about 15% with placebo, and was well tolerated. duration of analgesia was longer, and significantly fewer participants required rescue medication over 24 hours with the higher dose.
evidence from randomized trials does not support the use of lecithin in the treatment of patients with dementia. a moderate effect cannot be ruled out, but results from the small trials to date do not indicate priority for a large randomized trial.
in preterm and low birth weight infants, feeding with formula milk compared with donor breast milk results in a higher rate of short-term growth but also a higher risk of developing necrotising enterocolitis. there are only limited data on the comparison of feeding with formula milk versus nutrient-fortified donor breast milk. this limits the applicability of the findings as nutrient fortification of breast milk is now a common practice in neonatal care. future trials may compare growth, development and adverse outcomes in infants who receive formula milk versus nutrient-fortified donor breast milk given as a supplement to maternal expressed breast milk or as a sole diet.
currently available evidence concerning the efficacy of rheum officinale to improve scr and bun levels in patients with ckd is both scant and low quality. although rheum officinale does not appear to be associated with serious adverse events among patients with ckd, there is no current evidence to support any recommendation for its use.
there is evidence to show that therapy with dornase alfa over a one-month period is associated with an improvement in lung function in cf; results from a trial lasting six months also showed the same effect. therapy over a two-year period (based on one trial) significantly improved fev1 in children and there was a non-significant reduction in the risk of infective exacerbations. voice alteration and rash appear to be the only adverse events reported with increased frequency in randomised controlled trials.
ofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and gatifloxacin have been tested in rcts of standard first-line regimens based on rifampicin and pyrazinamide for treating drug-sensitive tb. there is insufficient evidence to be clear whether addition or substitution of fluoroquinolones for ethambutol or isoniazid in the first-line regimen reduces death or relapse, or increases culture conversion at eight weeks. much larger trials with fluoroquinolones in short course regimens of four months are currently in progress.
there is no consistent, bias-free evidence that acupuncture, acupressure, laser therapy or electrostimulation are effective for smoking cessation, but lack of evidence and methodological problems mean that no firm conclusions can be drawn. further, well designed research into acupuncture, acupressure and laser stimulation is justified since these are popular interventions and safe when correctly applied, though these interventions alone are likely to be less effective than evidence-based interventions.
the evidence base to support the common practice of superficial heat and cold for low back pain is limited and there is a need for future higher-quality randomised controlled trials. there is moderate evidence in a small number of trials that heat wrap therapy provides a small short-term reduction in pain and disability in a population with a mix of acute and sub-acute low-back pain, and that the addition of exercise further reduces pain and improves function. the evidence for the application of cold treatment to low-back pain is even more limited, with only three poor quality studies located. no conclusions can be drawn about the use of cold for low-back pain. there is conflicting evidence to determine the differences between heat and cold for low-back pain.
compared with no treatment, use of long-term, low-dose antibiotics did not significantly reduce the number of repeat symptomatic and febrile utis in children with vur. considerable heterogeneity in the analyses and inclusion of only one adequately blinded study, made drawing firm conclusions challenging. antibiotic prophylaxis significantly reduced the risk of developing new or progressive renal damage, but assuming an 8% baseline risk, 33 children would need long-term antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent one more child developing kidney damage over the course of two to three years. the added benefit of surgical or endoscopic correction of vur over antibiotic treatment alone remains unclear. eight children would require combined surgical and antibiotic treatment to prevent one additional child developing febrile uti by five years, but it would not cause fewer children developing renal damage.
there is insufficient evidence to support either high or low feedback during a prenatal ultrasound to reduce maternal anxiety and promote health behaviour.
this systematic review highlights the lack of high quality rcts that assess the efficacy and toxicity of immunosuppressants in inflammatory myositis.
as only one underpowered study was identified, we cannot distinguish between the contraceptive effectiveness of the diaphragm with and without spermicide. we cannot draw any conclusion at this point. randomized controlled trials with adequate numbers of participants would be required to adequately examine this issue. however, the study provides no evidence to change the commonly recommended practice of using the diaphragm with spermicide.
one small study failed to find a difference between two surgical techniques, although return to normal diet was more frequent in the group treated by temperature controlled radiofrequency tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. at present there is still debate as to the criteria required to diagnose significant obstructive sleep apnoea in children. also the natural history of the condition has not been fully delineated. there is an absence of randomised controlled trials investigating the efficacy of treatment of confirmed obstructive sleep apnoea with adenotonsillectomy in children. research is required before recommendations for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnoea in children can be formulated. the quality of research in this area could be improved with the use of sleep studies at baseline to determine the extent of severity of sleep apnoea in children who are recruited to studies in this area. long-term follow up is also required in order to explore the effect of adenotonsillectomy on paediatric sleep apnoea.
this review has significant limitations. however, our finding of uncertain efficacy of anti-histamines for chronic cough are similar to that for acute cough in children. in contrast to recommendations in adults with chronic cough, anti-histamines cannot be recommended as empirical therapy for children with chronic cough. if anti-histamines were to be trialled in these children, current data suggest a clinical response (time to response) occurs within two weeks of therapy. however the use of anti-histamines in children with non-specific cough has to be balanced against the well known risk of adverse events especially in very young children.
oxytocin appears to be beneficial for the prevention of postpartum haemorrhage. however, there is insufficient information about other outcomes and side-effects hence it is difficult to be confident about the trade-offs for these benefits. there seems little evidence in favour of ergot alkaloids alone compared to either oxytocin alone, or to ergometrine-oxytocin, but the data are sparse. more trials are needed in domiciliary deliveries in developing countries, which shoulder most of the burden of third stage complications. [note: the ten citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
since the last version of this review none of the three new relevant studies with 2397 participants have provided additional information to change the conclusions. treatment with a low-molecular-weight heparin or heparinoid after acute ischaemic stroke appears to decrease the occurrence of deep vein thrombosis compared with standard unfractionated heparin, but there are too few data to provide reliable information on their effects on other important outcomes, including death and intracranial haemorrhage.
there are insufficient data to inform practice. large randomised controlled trials are required to compare antifungal drugs, drug preparations or drug combinations for treating newborn infants with invasive fungal infection.
this review provides weak evidence of benefit on medication in children with rap. the lack of clear evidence of effectiveness for any of the recommended drugs suggests that there is little reason for their use outside of clinical trials. clinicians may choose to prescribe drugs in children with severe symptoms that have not responded to simple management. however, if using drugs as a "therapeutic trial", clinicians should be aware that, rap is a fluctuating condition and any "response" may reflect the natural history of the condition or a placebo effect rather than drug efficacy.
there is limited evidence to support or clearly disprove the value of the use of tilting or flexing the table, the use of wedges and cushions or the use of mechanical displacers. a left lateral tilt may be better than a right lateral tilt and manual displacers may be better than a left lateral tilt but larger studies with more robust data are needed to confirm these findings.
although the results of the trials were heterogeneous, on average, the administration of anabolic steroids appeared to result in a small increase in both lean body mass and body weight as compared with placebo. while these results suggest that anabolic steroids may be useful in the treatment of weight loss in hiv infected individuals, due to limitations, treatment recommendations cannot be made. further information is required regarding the long-term benefit and adverse effects of anabolic steroid use, the specific populations for which anabolic steroid therapy may be most beneficial, and the optimal regime. in addition, the correlation of improvement in lean body mass with more clinically relevant endpoints, such as physical functioning and survival, needs to be determined.
there is some evidence that for women having their first baby, pfmt can prevent urinary incontinence up to six months after delivery. there is support for the widespread recommendation that pfmt is an appropriate treatment for women with persistent postpartum urinary incontinence. it is possible that the effects of pfmt might be greater with targeted rather than mixed prevention and treatment approaches and in certain groups of women (for example primiparous women; women who had bladder neck hypermobility in early pregnancy, a large baby, or a forceps delivery). these and other uncertainties, particularly long-term effectiveness, require further testing.
in summary, the currently available evidence suggests a strong pfs benefit for hdt + asct compared with chemotherapy or immuno-chemotherapy in previously untreated patients with fl. no statistically significant differences in terms of os, trm and secondary cancers were detected. these effects are confirmed in a subgroup analysis (one trial) adding rituximab to both treatment arms. further trials evaluating this approach are needed to determine this effect more precisely in the era of rituximab. moreover, longer follow-up data are necessary to find out whether the pfs advantage will translate into an os advantage in previously untreated patients with fl. there is evidence that hdt + asct is advantageous in patients with relapsed fl.
zinc supplementation in children is associated with a reduction in the incidence and prevalence of pneumonia, the leading cause of death in children.
evidence from five rcts, only two of which addressed the most relevant question of primary effectiveness, provides limited evidence that ear drops are effective 30 minutes after administration in older children with aom. uncertainty exists as to the magnitude of this effect and more high-quality studies are needed.
there is some evidence from twelve studies that flossing in addition to toothbrushing reduces gingivitis compared to toothbrushing alone. there is weak, very unreliable evidence from 10 studies that flossing plus toothbrushing may be associated with a small reduction in plaque at 1 and 3 months. no studies reported the effectiveness of flossing plus toothbrushing for preventing dental caries.
the results of this review do not provide sufficient evidence on which to base clinical practice. there is a need for larger randomised controlled trials to address these issues.
sertindole may induce fewer movement disorders, but more cardiac effects, weight change and male sexual dysfunction than risperidone. however these data are based on only two studies and are too limited to allow firm conclusions. nothing can be said about the effects of sertindole compared with second generation antipsychotics other than risperidone. there are several relevant trials underway or completed and about to report.
although we found no evidence of a benefit of ilm peeling in terms of the primary outcome (visual acuity at six months), ilm peeling appears to be superior to its no-peeling counterpart as it offers more favourable cost effectiveness by increasing the likelihood of primary anatomical closure and subsequently decreasing the likelihood of further surgery, with no differences in unwanted side-effects compared with no peeling.
there is still remarkably little research on this common and, to patients, very significant condition. it is not possible to draw any recommendation for bowel care in people with neurological diseases from the trials included in this review. bowel management for these people must remain empirical until well-designed controlled trials with adequate numbers and clinically relevant outcome measures become available.
this review has demonstrated the feasibility and some potential benefits of orientation interventions. orientation interventions may reduce distress in patients, but the quality of the evidence is low. however, most of the other outcomes remain inconclusive (patient knowledge recall/ satisfaction). the majority of studies were subject to high risk of bias, and were likely to be insufficiently powered. further well conducted and powered rcts are required to provide evidence for determining the most appropriate intensity, nature, mode and resources for such interventions. patient and carer-focused outcomes should be included.
uvi of oxytocin solution is an inexpensive and simple intervention that could be performed while placental delivery is awaited. however, high-quality randomized trials show that the use of oxytocin has little or no effect. further research into the optimal timing of manual removal and into uvi of prostaglandins or plasma expander is warranted.
we found no overall difference between carbamazepine and phenobarbitone for time to 12-month remission or time to first seizure, however, subgroup analyses for time to first seizure suggest an advantage with phenobarbitone for partial onset seizures and a clinical advantage with carbamazepine for generalized onset tonic-clonic seizures. phenobarbitone is significantly more likely to be withdrawn, indicating that it is less well tolerated than carbamazepine.
some herbal medicines show hypoglycaemic effect sin type 2 diabetes. however, these findings should be carefully interpreted due to the low methodological quality, small sample size, and limited number of trials. in the light of some positive findings, some herbal medicines deserve further examination in high-quality trials.
overall, there is no evidence of a beneficial or adverse effect of corticosteroids in patients with either sah or pich. confidence intervals are wide and include clinically significant effects in both directions.
oral calorie supplements do not confer any additional benefit in the nutritional management of moderately malnourished children with cf over and above the use of dietary advice and monitoring alone. while nutritional supplements may be used, they should not be regarded as essential. further randomised controlled trials are needed to establish the role of short-term oral protein energy supplements in people with cf and acute weight loss and also for the long-term nutritional management of adults with cf or advanced lung disease, or both.
zinc administered within 24 hours of onset of symptoms reduces the duration of common cold symptoms in healthy people but some caution is needed due to the heterogeneity of the data. as the zinc lozenges formulation has been widely studied and there is a significant reduction in the duration of cold at a dose of ≥ 75 mg/day, for those considering using zinc it would be best to use it at this dose throughout the cold. regarding prophylactic zinc supplementation, currently no firm recommendation can be made because of insufficient data. when using zinc lozenges (not as syrup or tablets) the likely benefit has to be balanced against side effects, notably a bad taste and nausea.
this review provides some evidence for the effectiveness of cbt for treatment of acute stress disorder following mild tbi and cbt combined with neurorehabilitation for targeting general anxiety symptomatology in people with mild to moderate tbi. these findings need to be viewed in light of the small number, small sample size and heterogeneous characteristics of current trials published in this area. more trials focusing on comparable psychological interventions, severity of injury of participants and diagnosis of anxiety disorder(s) are needed.
this review indicates that consistent use of condoms results in 80% reduction in hiv incidence. consistent use is defined as using a condom for all acts of penetrative vaginal intercourse. because the studies used in this review did not report on the "correctness" of use, namely whether condoms were used correctly and perfectly for each and every act of intercourse, effectiveness and not efficacy is estimated. also, this estimate refers in general to the male condom and not specifically to the latex condom, since studies also tended not to specify the type of condom that was used. thus, condom effectiveness is similar to, although lower than, that for contraception.
the evidence that calcium reduces cramp is weak and seems to depend on placebo effect. the evidence for sodium chloride is stronger but the results of the sodium chloride trial may no longer be relevant because of dietary changes which include an increased sodium intake in the general population. it is not possible to recommend multivitamins with mineral supplementation, as it is not clear which ingredient, if any, is helping. if a woman finds cramp troublesome in pregnancy, the best evidence is for magnesium lactate or citrate taken as 5mmol in the morning and 10mmol in the evening. [note: the five citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is insufficient evidence to draw any definitive conclusions about the effects of fitness training on cardiorespiratory fitness. whilst it appears to be a safe and accepted intervention for people with tbi, more adequately powered and well-designed studies are required to determine the effects across a range of outcome measures.
current evidence suggests that making an abdominal incision with electrosurgery may be as safe as using a scalpel. however, these conclusions are based on relatively few events and more research is needed. the relative effects of scalpels and electrosurgery are unclear for the outcomes of blood loss, pain, and incision time.
there is limited evidence suggesting probiotics may be effective in treating persistent diarrhoea in children.
we found no clear evidence to support routine antiepileptic drug serum concentration measurement with the aim of reaching predefined target ranges for the optimisation of treatment of patients with newly-diagnosed epilepsy with antiepileptic drug monotherapy. however, this does not exclude the possible usefulness of therapeutic drug monitoring of specific antiepileptic drugs during polytherapy, in special situations or in selected patients, although evidence is lacking.
many abstinence-plus programs appear to reduce short-term and long-term hiv risk behavior among youth in high-income countries. evidence for program effects on biological measures is limited. evaluations consistently show no adverse program effects for any outcomes, including the incidence and frequency of sexual activity. trials comparing abstinence-only, abstinence-plus, and safer-sex interventions are needed.
evidence from randomised controlled trials indicates that ketotifen alone or in combination with other co-interventions improves control of asthma and wheezing in children with mild and moderate asthma. however due to the high proportion of children with atopy in some trials the results cannot necessarily be generalised to all asthmatic children. the benefit is obtained at the cost of minor side effects, namely sedation and weight gain. the validity of this conclusion is limited by the low reported, methodological quality of included trials.
evidence suggests oral or intravenous bisphosphonates increase bmd in children and adults with oi. these were not shown to be different in their ability to increase bmd; it is unclear whether either treatment decreases fractures. additional studies may determine whether bisphosphonates improve clinical status (reduce fractures and pain; improve growth and functional mobility) in this population. optimal method, duration of therapy and long-term safety of bisphosphonate therapy requires further investigation.
there are a very limited number of research studies allowing conclusions to be drawn about the effectiveness of community-based injury prevention programmes to prevent burns and scalds in children. there is a pressing need to evaluate high-quality community-based intervention programmes based on efficacious counter-measures to reduce burns and scalds in children. it is important that a framework for considering the problem of burns and scalds in children from a prevention perspective be articulated, and that an evidence-based suite of interventions be combined to create programme guidelines suitable for implementation in communities throughout the world.
the risk of developing tns after spinal anaesthesia with lidocaine was significantly higher than when bupivacaine, prilocaine, or procaine were used. the term 'transient neurological symptoms' implies neurologic pathology. failing identification of the pathogenesis of tns, consideration should be given to choosing a neutral descriptive term which does not imply a particular causation. one study about the impact of tns on patient satisfaction and functional impairment demonstrated that non-tns patients were more satisfied and had less functional impairment after surgery than tns patients, but this did not influence their willingness to recommend spinal anaesthesia.
considering the internal and external validity of the evidence, tranexamic acid cannot be recommended for routine use. additional trials in which tranexamic acid is used in combination with the currently recommended interventions are required.
virtual reality training can supplement standard laparoscopic surgical training of apprenticeship and is at least as effective as video trainer training in supplementing standard laparoscopic training. further research of better methodological quality and more patient-relevant outcomes are needed.
antibiotic treatment is effective in reducing the risk of pyelonephritis in pregnancy. a reduction in low birthweight is consistent with current theories about the role of infection in adverse pregnancy outcomes, but this association should be interpreted with caution given the poor quality of the included studies.
evidence is insufficient to show clinically meaningful differences between antibiotics for gabhs tonsillopharyngitis. limited evidence in adults suggests cephalosporins are more effective than penicillin for relapse, but the nntb is high. limited evidence in children suggests carbacephem is more effective for symptom resolution. data on complications are too scarce to draw conclusions. based on these results and considering the low cost and absence of resistance, penicillin can still be recommended as first choice.
despite its initial promise, i.e. the potential neuroprotective properties, and its role in the treatment of parkinson's disease sufferers, selegiline for alzheimer's disease has proved disappointing. although there is no evidence of a significant adverse event profile, there is also no evidence of a clinically meaningful benefit for alzheimer's disease sufferers. this is true irrespective of the outcome measure evaluated, i.e. cognition, emotional state, activities of daily living, and global assessment, whether in the short, or longer term (up to 69 weeks), where this has been assessed. there would seem to be no justification, therefore, to use it in the treatment of people with alzheimer's disease, nor for any further studies of its efficacy in alzheimer's disease.
the addition of caffeine (≥ 100 mg) to a standard dose of commonly used analgesics provides a small but important increase in the proportion of participants who experience a good level of pain relief.
the only trial included in this review attempts to address the role of castor oil as an induction agent. the trial was small and of poor methodological quality. further research is needed to attempt to quantify the efficacy of castor oil as an induction agent. [note: the six citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
in the previous version of this review, evidence in support of acupuncture for migraine prophylaxis was considered promising but insufficient. now, with 12 additional trials, there is consistent evidence that acupuncture provides additional benefit to treatment of acute migraine attacks only or to routine care. there is no evidence for an effect of 'true' acupuncture over sham interventions, though this is difficult to interpret, as exact point location could be of limited importance. available studies suggest that acupuncture is at least as effective as, or possibly more effective than, prophylactic drug treatment, and has fewer adverse effects. acupuncture should be considered a treatment option for patients willing to undergo this treatment.
moderate quality evidence shows that patients with acute lbp may experience small benefits in pain relief and functional improvement from advice to stay active compared to advice to rest in bed; patients with sciatica experience little or no difference between the two approaches. low quality evidence suggests little or no difference between those who received advice to stay active, exercises or physiotherapy. further research is very likely to have an important impact on the estimate of effect and is likely to change our confidence in it.
uncertainty remains about the degree of protection that vaccination affords against asthma exacerbations that are related to influenza infection. evidence from more recently published randomised trials of inactivated split-virus influenza vaccination indicates that there is no significant increase in asthma exacerbations immediately after vaccination in adults or children over three years of age. we were unable to address concerns regarding possible increased wheezing and hospital admissions in infants given live intranasal vaccination.
the quality of the evidence base currently provides very little guidance for the development of services. if randomised controlled trials are not feasible then consideration should be given to alternative study designs, such as prospective systems of audit conducted across several centres, as this has the potential to improve the current level of evidence. these studies should include baseline measurement at admission along with demographic data, and outcomes measured using a few standardised robust instruments.
there is a need for evaluations of interventions combining provider training and patient education, and for evaluations conducted in developing countries. all partner notification evaluations, but especially those among hiv positive patients, need to measure potential harmful effects, such as domestic violence, to ensure that partner notification does more good than harm.
there is as yet insufficient evidence to say that antidepressant drug therapy improves tinnitus.
inhaled analgesia appears to be effective in reducing pain intensity and in giving pain relief in labour. however, substantial heterogeneity was detected for pain intensity. furthermore, nitrous oxide appears to result in more side effects compared with flurane derivatives. flurane derivatives result in more drowsiness when compared with nitrous oxide. when inhaled analgesia is compared with no treatment or placebo, nitrous oxide appears to result in even more side effects such as nausea, vomiting, dizziness and drowsiness. there is no evidence for differences for any of the outcomes comparing one strength verus a different strength of inhaled analgesia, comparing different delivery systems or comparing inhaled analgesia with tens.
in view of methodological deficiencies and the limited number of individuals studied, we have found no reliable evidence to support the use of psychological treatments and further trials are needed. since the last version of this review, none of the new relevant studies have provided additional information to change the conclusions.
there was insufficient evidence to support the use of cyclobenzaprine in the treatment of mp. we identified only two small studies in which a total of 35 participants were given cyclobenzaprine, and it was not possible to estimate risks for benefits or harms. further high quality rcts of cyclobenzaprine for treating mp need to be conducted before firm conclusions on its effectiveness and safety can be made. experts in this area should elect cut-off points for participants to identify whether a patient has achieved a clinically relevant reduction of pain (primary outcome), so that their results can be combined easily into future versions of this review.
more trials with a larger number of participants are needed before a firm conclusion about the efficacy and safety of arteether can be reached.
there is not enough evidence to assess whether theophylline or its analogues, e.g. aminophylline, are safe and improve outcome in people with acute ischaemic stroke.
this review provides little support for oxygen supplementation during exercise training for individuals with copd, but the evidence is very limited. studies with larger number of participants and strong design are required to permit strong conclusions, especially for functional outcomes such as symptom alleviation, health-related quality of life and ambulation.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of trazodone as a treatment for behavioural and psychological manifestations of dementia. in order to assess effectiveness and safety of trazodone, longer-term randomized controlled trials are needed, involving larger samples of participants with a wider variety of types and severities of dementia.
the small number of included trials and their poor methodological quality provided insufficient reliable evidence to support the routine use of this medication for preventing the incidence of painful sickle cell disease crises.
data from literature are hardly comparable; programs vary widely with regard to the assessment of outcome measures, impairing the application of meta-analysis. the studies included in this review confirm that slow tapering with temporary substitution of long- acting opioids, can reduce withdrawal severity. nevertheless, the majority of patients relapsed to heroin use.
routine prophylactic stenting reduces the incidence of mucs. studies comparing selective stenting and universal prophylactic stenting, whilst difficult to design and analyse, would address the unresolved quality of life and economic issues.
data from three clinical trials assessing ale for treating hypercholesterolaemia are available. athough the trials are of adequate methodological quality they have some shortcomings and one is available as abstract only. there is an indication that ale has potential in lowering cholesterol levels, but the evidence is, as yet, not convincing. the limited data on safety suggest only mild, transient and infrequent adverse events with the short term use of ale.
high-frequency tens was found to be effective for the treatment of dysmenorrhoea by a number of small trials. the minor adverse effects reported in one trial require further investigation. there is insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of low-frequency tens in reducing dysmenorrhoea.
overall, the data at two years were insufficient to make any practice recommendations. however, the data on the anatomic remodeling of dissected aortas observed after tevar + omt is encouraging and future studies should follow up cases for at least five years to see if early endovascular interventions, even in stable initially uncomplicated type b patients, are of long-term benefit.
natural frequencies are probably better understood than percentages in the context of diagnostic or screening tests. for communicating risk reductions, relative risk reduction (rrr), compared with absolute risk reduction (arr) and number needed to treat (nnt), may be perceived to be larger and is more likely to be persuasive. however, it is uncertain whether presenting rrr is likely to help people make decisions most consistent with their own values and, in fact, it could lead to misinterpretation. more research is needed to further explore this question.
there are insufficient data from different countries on the use of clofibrate in combination with phototherapy for hyperbilirubinaemia to make recommendations for practice. there is a need for larger trials to determine how effective clofibrate is in reducing the need for, and duration of, phototherapy in term and preterm infants with hyperbilirubinaemia.
from the two well-designed and low risk of bias trials included in this review it was shown that the failure of molar tubes bonded with either a chemically-cured or light-cured adhesive was considerably higher than that of molar bands cemented with glass ionomer cement. one trial indicated that there was less decalcification with molar bands cemented with glass ionomer cement than with bonded molar tubes cemented with a light-cured adhesive. however, given there are limited data for this outcome, further evidence is required to draw more robust conclusions.
with only one rct included, there is insufficient evidence to base any recommendations about the use of any form of carbohydrate for enhancing cognitive performance in older adults with normal cognition or mild cognitive impairment. more studies of many different carbohydrates are needed to tease out complex nutritional issues and to further evaluate memory improvement.
while tamoxifen after local excision for dcis (with or without adjuvant radiotherapy) reduced the risk of recurrent dcis (in the ipsi- and contralateral breast), it did not reduce the risk of overall mortality.
fixed dose lmwh is more effective and safer than adjusted dose ufh for the initial treatment of vte. compared to ufh, lmwh significantly reduced the incidence of thrombotic complications, the occurrence of major haemorrhage during initial treatment and overall mortality at follow up.
zonisamide has efficacy as an add-on treatment in people with drug-resistant partial epilepsy. minimum effective and maximum tolerated doses cannot be identified. the trials reviewed were of 12 week duration and results cannot be used to confirm longer periods of effectiveness in seizure control. the results cannot be extrapolated to monotherapy or to people with other seizure types or epilepsy syndromes.
treatment with 7% hs for 48 weeks showed a small improvement in fev1 at four weeks; however, this was not sustained at 48 weeks (primary outcome measure of the only long-term trial). unlike rhdnase, hs can't, in the long term, be said to improve lung function. however, it did improve quality of life and reduce pulmonary exacerbations. delivered following a bronchodilator, hs appears inexpensive and safe with no increased infection risk. we believe there is sufficient evidence to recommend using hs in cf; qualifying this we highlight that the only long-term trial failed to demonstrate a significant difference in its primary outcome (lung function) with improvements only in secondary outcomes.
the results do not provide sufficient evidence for or against recommending probiotics for the treatment of bv. the metronidazole/probiotic regimen and probiotic/estriol perparation appear promising but well-designed randomized controlled trials with standardized methodologies and larger patient size are needed.
there is not sufficient evidence to determine the optimal method of enteral feeding for patients with head and neck cancer receiving radiotherapy and/or chemoradiotherapy. further trials of the two methods of enteral feeding, incorporating larger sample sizes, are required.
mtx has a substantial clinical and statistically significant benefit compared to placebo in the short term treatment of people with ra although its use is associated with a high withdrawal rate due to adverse events.
it is not possible to draw any conclusions from this review. the number of people included in the studies is less than 50 and the reported results are inadequate.
adjuvant rt after rp improves overall survival and reduces the rate of distant metastases, but these effects are only evident with longer follow up. at 5 and 10 years it improves local control and reduces the risk of biochemical failure, although the latter is not a clinical endpoint. moderate or severe acute and late toxicity is minimal. there is an increased risk of urinary stricture and incontinence, but no detriment to quality of life, based on limited data. given that the majority of men who have undergone a rp have a longer life expectancy, radiotherapy should be considered for those with high-risk features following radical prostatectomy. the optimal timing is unclear.
bed rest ranging from 2 to 12 days appears to be as safe as longer periods of bed rest. the quality of most trials is unsatisfactory. current bed rest recommendations are not supported by the existing evidence as the optimal duration of bed rest is unknown. the lack of adequate trials is surprising, considering the large size of several studies to compare effectiveness of drugs on people with ami.
there is no evidence to suggest that primary stenting reduces mortality when compared to balloon angioplasty. stenting seems to be associated with a reduced risk of reinfarction and target vessel revascularization, but potential confounding due to unbalanced post-interventional antithrombotic/anticoagulant therapies can not be ruled out on basis of this review.
there is inconclusive evidence to show whether or not nsaids (naproxen) are effective in managing pain caused by endometriosis. there is no evidence on whether any individual nsaid is more effective than another. as shown in other cochrane reviews, women using nsaids need to be aware of the possibility that these drugs may cause unintended effects.
although statins improve lipid profiles and reduce testosterone levels in women with pcos, there is no evidence that statins improve resumption of menstrual regularity or spontaneous ovulation, nor is there any improvement of hirsutism or acne. there is a need for further research to be performed with large sample sizes and well-designed rcts to assess clinical outcomes.
tacrolimus may be effective for short-term clinical improvement in patients with refractory ulcerative colitis. however, these results should be interpreted with caution due to the small number of patients enrolled in the trial and other study limitations. insufficient treatment and follow-up intervals prevent any conclusions with regard to long term safety and efficacy. the use of tacrolimus in the clinical setting requires careful consideration of risks versus benefits as well as close monitoring for adverse events. more data from well designed and controlled studies are needed to determine the long-term efficacy and safety of tacrolimus.
in the populations studied, the iud was more effective than hormonal contraception with respect to pregnancy prevention. high quality research is urgently needed to compare the effects, if any, of these two commonly used contraception methods on hiv acquisition/seroconversion and hiv/aids disease progression.
very low quality evidence from one small, randomised trial did not show a statistically significant benefit from oral prednisone compared with no treatment. nevertheless, corticosteroids are commonly used in practice. according to moderate quality evidence from one rct, the efficacy of high-dose monthly oral dexamethasone was not statistically different from that of daily standard-dose oral prednisolone. most adverse events occurred with similar frequencies in both groups, but sleeplessness and moon facies were significantly less common with monthly dexamethasone. further research is needed to identify factors which predict response.
a low-gi diet can improve glycaemic control in diabetes without compromising hypoglycaemic events.
there is not enough evidence from the available rcts to conclude that cpm reduces vte after tka. we cannot assess the effect of cpm on death because no such events occurred amongst the participants of these trials.
a high initial concentration sevoflurane technique probably offers more rapid induction of anaesthesia and a similar rate of complications except for apnoea, which may be more common with a high initial concentration. however, this conclusion is not definitive.
there is insufficient evidence to conclude that the clinical benefits of tmlr outweigh the potential risks. the procedure is associated with a significant early mortality.
the combination of antipsychotics and antidepressants may be effective in treating negative symptoms of schizophrenia, but the amount of information is currently too limited to allow any firm conclusions. large, pragmatic, well-designed and reported long term trials are justified.
these conclusions refer to the four different types of platelet transfusion trial separately. firstly, there is no evidence that a prophylactic platelet transfusion policy prevents bleeding. two large trials comparing a therapeutic versus prophylactic platelet transfusion strategy, that have not yet been published, should provide important new data on this comparison. secondly, there is no evidence, at the moment, to suggest a change from the current practice of using a platelet count of 10 x 109/l. however, the evidence for a platelet count threshold of 10 x 109/l being equivalent to 20 x 109/l is not as definitive as it would first appear and further research is required. thirdly, platelet dose does not affect the number of patients with significant bleeding, but whether it affects number of days each patient bleeds for is as yet undetermined. there is no evidence that platelet dose affects the incidence of who grade 4 bleeding.prophylactic platelet transfusions were more effective than platelet-poor plasma at preventing bleeding.
there were no randomised trials that compared a policy of immediate radical radiotherapy with palliative radiotherapy given when patients develop symptoms. in the absence of such trials, radical radiotherapy appears to result in a better survival than might be expected had treatment not been given. a substantial, though variable, proportion of patients died during follow-up from causes other than cancer. the optimal radiation dose and treatment technique (particularly with respect to mediastinal irradiation) remain uncertain.
we found a paucity of large, high quality studies to inform analysis of thyroid hormone interventions for the treatment of people with aki. current evidence suggested that thyroid hormone therapy may be associated with worse outcomes for patients with established aki; therefore, its use for these patients should be avoided. the role of thyroid hormone therapy in preventing aki has not been adequately investigated and may be considered in future clinical studies.
there is moderate quality evidence that antiangiogenic drugs provide a definite, but small, benefit compared to current therapeutic options for dmo, i.e. grid laser photocoagulation, or no treatment when laser is not an option. the quality and quantity of the evidence was larger for ranibizumab, but there was little power to investigate drug differences. most data were obtained at one year, and a long-term confirmation is needed, since dmo is a chronic condition. safety of both drug and the intravitreal injection procedure were good in the trials, but further long-term data are needed to exclude small, but clinically important differences regarding systemic adverse events.
the meta-analysis supports that tips was more effective at removing ascites as compared with paracentesis without a significant difference in mortality, gastrointestinal bleeding, infection, and acute renal failure. however, tips patients develop hepatic encephalopathy significantly more often.
currently, there is inconclusive evidence from randomised controlled trials (rcts) to support or refute the routine use of granulocyte transfusions in neutropenic, septic neonates. researchers are encouraged to conduct adequately powered multi-centre trials of granulocyte transfusions in neutropenic septic neonates.
exercise programmes were of significant benefit compared with placebo or usual care in improving walking time and distance in selected patients with leg pain from ic.
there is some evidence that guideline-driven care is effective in changing the process and outcome of care provided by professions allied to medicine. however, caution is needed in generalising findings to other professions and settings.
in women with metastatic breast cancer and where hormone receptors are present, a policy of treating first with endocrine therapy rather than chemotherapy is recommended except in the presence of rapidly progressive disease.
limited evidence is available from randomised controlled trials on the relative effectiveness of surgical versus conservative treatment for acute middle third clavicle fractures. treatment options must be chosen on an individual patient basis, after careful consideration of the relative benefits and harms of each intervention and of patient preferences.
the effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation interventions for reducing the disabling effects of neglect and increasing independence remains unproven. as a consequence, no rehabilitation approach can be supported or refuted based on current evidence from rcts. however, there is some very limited evidence that cognitive rehabilitation may have an immediate beneficial effect on tests of neglect. this emerging evidence justifies further clinical trials of cognitive rehabilitation for neglect. however, future studies need to have appropriate high quality methodological design and reporting, to examine persisting effects of treatment and to include an attention control comparator.
this review does not give us enough data to be able to say whether hypertonic crystalloid is better than isotonic and near isotonic crystalloid for the resuscitation of patients with trauma or burns, or those undergoing surgery. however, the confidence intervals are wide and do not exclude clinically significant differences. further trials which clearly state the type and amount of fluid used and that are large enough to detect a clinically important difference are needed.
there is little evidence available to evaluate the efficacy of buflomedil for ic. most trials were excluded due to poor quality. the two included trials showed moderately positive results; these are undermined by publication bias since we know of at least another four unpublished, irretrievable, and inconclusive studies. buflomedil's benefit is small in relation to safety issues and its narrow therapeutic range.
there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of prophylactic oral betamimetics for preventing preterm birth in women with a twin pregnancy.
flurbiprofen at doses of 50 mg and 100 mg is an effective analgesic in moderate to severe acute postoperative pain. the nnt for at least 50% pain relief is similar to that of commonly used nsaids such as ibuprofen and naproxen at usual doses. use of rescue medication indicates a duration of action exceeding 6 hours.
there is insufficient evidence on the effects of momordica charantia for type 2 diabetes mellitus. further studies are therefore required to address the issues of standardization and the quality control of preparations. for medical nutritional therapy, further observational trials evaluating the effects of momordica charantia are needed before rcts are established to guide any recommendations in clinical practice.
we found low quality, but consistent evidence to suggest that women with gynaecological cancer who received treatment in specialised centres had longer survival than those managed elsewhere. the evidence was stronger for ovarian cancer than for other gynaecological cancers. further studies of survival are needed, with more robust designs than retrospective observational studies. research should also assess the quality of life associated with centralisation of gynaecological cancer care. most of the available evidence addresses ovarian cancer in developed countries; future studies should be extended to other gynaecological cancers within different healthcare systems.
contrary to commonly held beliefs, the available low to moderate quality evidence suggests that both attribute and goal framing may have little if any consistent effect on health consumers' behaviour. the unexplained heterogeneity between studies suggests the possibility of a framing effect under specific conditions. future research needs to investigate these conditions.
because there were significant methodological limitations and the observed effect sizes were small, it is not appropriate to recommend any specific antenatal bf education.there is an urgent need to conduct rcts with adequate power to evaluate the effectiveness of antenatal bf education.
metoclopramide enhanced the migration of naso-enteral tubes, but the results did not reach conventional statistical significance. the reasons may include: small studies, underpowered, varying doses, etc. in clinical practice, clinicians should no longer use metoclopramide for this purpose. however, more randomised clinical trials should be performed with a significant sample size, administering metoclopramide or not. the use of metoclopramide may include adverse reactions, such as depression, high blood pressure, decrease of libido, headache, skin rash, fatigue, fever, hyperactivity, insomnia, nausea, sedation, drowsiness, agitation, extrapyramidal reactions (impaired speech or impaired swallowing, unsteady gait, inflexibility of upper and lower members, tremor).
although there is limited evidence in favour of scs for failed back surgery syndrome and complex regional pain syndrome type i, more trials are needed to confirm whether scs is an effective treatment for certain types of chronic pain. in addition, there needs to be a debate about trial designs that will provide the best evidence for assessing this type of intervention.
the limited evidence from the randomised trials undertaken to date is insufficient to determine whether there are important differences in outcome between different designs of intramedullary nails used in the internal fixation of extracapsular hip fractures. given the evidence of superiority of the sliding hip screw compared with intramedullary nails for extracapsular hip fractures, further studies comparing different designs of intramedullary nails are not a priority. any new design should be evaluated in a randomised comparison with the sliding hip screw.
this review suggests that the supervised regular use of fluoride mouthrinse at two main strengths and rinsing frequencies is associated with a clear reduction in caries increment in children. in populations with caries increment of 0.25 d(m)fs per year, 16 children will need to use a fluoride mouthrinse (rather than a non-fluoride rinse) to avoid one d(m)fs; in populations with a caries increment of 2.14 d(m)fs per year, 2 children will need to rinse to avoid one d(m)fs. there is a need for complete reporting of side effects and acceptability data in fluoride mouthrinse trials.
both conventional occlusion and atropine penalization produce visual acuity improvement in the amblyopic eye. atropine penalization appears to be as effective as conventional occlusion, although the magnitude of improvement differed among the three trials. atropine penalization can be used as first line treatment for amblyopia.
piroxicam appears to be of similar efficacy to other nsaids and intramuscular morphine 10 mg when used as a single oral dose in the treatment of moderate to severe postoperative pain.
sildenafil in the treatment of pphn has significant potential especially in resource limited settings. however, a large scale randomised trial comparing sildenafil with the currently used vasodilator, inhaled nitric oxide, is needed to assess efficacy and safety.
a modest reduction in salt intake for 4 or more weeks causes significant and, from a population viewpoint, important falls in bp in both hypertensive and normotensive individuals, irrespective of sex and ethnic group. with salt reduction, there is a small physiological increase in plasma renin activity, aldosterone and noradrenaline. there is no significant change in lipid levels. these results provide further strong support for a reduction in population salt intake. this will likely lower population bp and, thereby, reduce cardiovascular disease. additionally, our analysis demonstrates a significant association between the reduction in 24-h urinary sodium and the fall in systolic bp, indicating the greater the reduction in salt intake, the greater the fall in systolic bp. the current recommendations to reduce salt intake from 9-12 to 5-6 g/d will have a major effect on bp, but are not ideal. a further reduction to 3 g/d will have a greater effect and should become the long term target for population salt intake.
there is a relatively high rate of spontaneous visual recovery in ton and there is no convincing data that steroids provide any additional visual benefit over observation alone. recent evidence also suggests a possible detrimental effect of steroids in ton and further studies are urgently needed to clarify this important issue. each case therefore needs to be assessed on an individual basis and proper informed consent is paramount.
there is currently no evidence from randomised studies that influenza vaccine given to people with cystic fibrosis is of benefit to them. there remains a need for a well-constructed clinical study, that assesses the effectiveness of influenza vaccination on important clinical outcome measures.
in short-term studies, paliperidone palmitate is an antipsychotic drug that is more efficacious than placebo. we found its adverse effects to be similar to those of its related compounds, paliperidone and risperidone, with extrapyramidal movement disorders, weight gain, and tachycardia all more common with paliperidone palmitate than placebo. while no difference was found in the incidence of reported adverse sexual outcomes, paliperidone palmitate is associated with substantial increases in serum prolactin. when flexibly dosed with a mean doses of approximately 70 to 110 mg every four weeks, paliperidone palmitate appears comparable in efficacy and tolerability to risperidone long-acting injection flexibly dosed with mean doses of approximately 35 mg every two weeks.
there was limited evidence from randomised controlled trials regarding the use of oestrogens for the prevention and management of pelvic organ prolapse. the use of local oestrogen in conjunction with pelvic floor muscle training before surgery may reduce the incidence of post-operative cystitis within four weeks after surgery. oral raloxifene may reduce the need for pelvic organ prolapse surgery in women older than 60 years although this cannot be taken as an indication for practice. there is a need for rigorous randomised controlled trials with long term follow up to assess oestrogen preparations for prevention and management of pelvic organ prolapse, particularly as an adjunctive treatment for women using pessaries and also before and after prolapse surgery.
there is inadequate evidence to evaluate the effect of exercise on functional ability in people with peripheral neuropathy. the results suggest that progressive resisted exercise may improve muscle strength in affected muscles.
we found no difference between perioperative thromboprophylaxis with lmwh verus ufh in their effects on mortality and embolic outcomes in patients with cancer. further trials are needed to more carefully evaluate the benefits and harms of different heparin thromboprophylaxis strategies in this population.
chemoprophylaxis or ipt reduces antenatal parasite prevalence and placental malaria when given to women in all parity groups. they also have positive effects on birthweight and possibly on perinatal death in low-parity women.
there is currently no evidence to support or refute the use of ischaemic preconditioning in donor liver retrievals. further studies are necessary to identify the optimal ischaemic preconditioning stimulus.
there is evidence that comprehensive tobacco control programmes which include mass media campaigns can be effective in changing smoking behaviour in adults, but the evidence comes from a heterogeneous group of studies of variable methodological quality. one state-wide tobacco control programme (massachusetts) showed positive results up to eight years after the campaign. another (california) showed positive results during the period of adequate funding and implementation and in final evaluation since the beginning of the programme. six of nine studies carried out in communities or regions showed some positive effects on smoking behaviour and at least one significant change in smoking prevalence (sydney). the intensity and duration of mass media campaigns may influence effectiveness, but length of follow-up and concurrent secular trends and events can make this difficult to quantify. no consistent relationship was observed between campaign effectiveness and age, education, ethnicity or gender.
there is evidence that statin therapy in patients with a history of ischaemic stroke or tia significantly reduces subsequent major coronary events but only marginally reduces the risk of stroke recurrence. there is no clear evidence of beneficial effect from statins in those with previous haemorrhagic stroke and it is unclear whether statins should be started immediately post stroke or later. in view of this and the evidence of the benefit of statin therapy in those with a history of chd, patients with ischaemic stroke or tia, with or without a history of established chd, should receive statins.
available evidence suggests that iabp may have a beneficial effect on the haemodynamics, however there is no convincing randomised data to support the use of iabp in infarct related cardiogenic shock.
there are very limited data from randomised trials on which to assess the effects of clinical decision support systems in neonatal care. further evaluation of cdss using randomised controlled trials is warranted.
the therapeutic efficacy of factor xa inhibitors in acs seemed to be related to a reduced risk in all-cause mortality at 90 to 180 days, with a better safety profile than enoxaparin in terms of reduce incidence of major and minor bleeding.
currently available evidence does not support the clinical or investigational use of fluoropyrimidine-based hai alone for the treatment of patients with unresectable crc liver metastases: in fact, the greater tumor response rate obtained with this hai regimen does not translate into a survival advantage over fluoropyrimidine alone sct.
two studies show su leading to earlier insulin dependence and a meta-analysis of four studies with considerable heterogeneity showed poorer metabolic control if su is prescribed for patients with lada compared to insulin. one study showed that vitamin d with insulin may protect pancreatic beta cells in lada. novel treatments such as gad65 in certain doses (20 μg) have been suggested to maintain fasting and stimulated c-peptide levels. however, there is no significant evidence for or against other lines of treatment of lada.
there is limited benefit to stenting lesions of the superficial femoral artery in addition to angioplasty, however this cannot be recommended routinely based on the results of this analysis.
in terms of postoperative pain and speed and safety of recovery, there is inadequate evidence to determine whether coblation tonsillectomy is better or worse than other methods of tonsillectomy. evidence from a large prospective audit suggests that it has been associated with a higher level of morbidity, in terms of postoperative bleeding. large, well-designed randomised controlled trials supplemented by data from large prospective audits are needed to produce information on effectiveness and morbidity respectively.
lasik gives a faster visual recovery and is a less painful technique than prk. the two techniques appear to give similar outcomes one year after surgery. further trials using contemporary techniques are required to determine whether lasik and prk as currently practised are equally safe. randomising eyes to treatment is an efficient design, but only if analysed properly. in future trials, more efforts could be made to mask the assessment of outcome.
there is currently little evidence about the efficacy of behavioural or cognitive-behavioural training intervention for foster carers. the need for further research in this area is highlighted.
for women making slow progress in spontaneous labour, treatment with oxytocin as compared with no treatment or delayed oxytocin treatment did not result in any discernable difference in the number of caesarean sections performed. in addition there were no detectable adverse effects for mother or baby. the use of oxytocin was associated with a reduction in the time to delivery of approximately two hours which might be important to some women. however, if the primary goal of this treatment is to reduce caesarean section rates, then doctors and midwives may have to look for alternative options.
bedtime nph insulin combined with oral hypoglycaemic agents provides comparable glycaemic control to insulin monotherapy and is associated with less weight gain if metformin is used.
minimal poorly reported trial data suggests that bromperidol decanoate may be better than placebo injection but less valuable than fluphenazine or haloperidol decanoate. if bromperidol decanoate is available it may be a viable choice, especially when there are reasons not to use fluphenazine or haloperidol decanoate. well-conducted and reported randomised trials are needed to inform practice.
there is very limited support for the use of low-frequency rtms for the treatment of patients with tinnitus. when considering the impact of tinnitus on patients' quality of life, support is from a single study with a low risk of bias based on a single outcome measure at a single point in time. when considering the impact on tinnitus loudness, this is based on the analysis of pooled data with a large confidence interval. studies suggest that rtms is a safe treatment for tinnitus in the short-term, however there were insufficient data to provide any support for the safety of this treatment in the long-term. more prospective, randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind studies with large sample sizes are needed to confirm the effectiveness of rtms for tinnitus patients. uniform, validated, tinnitus-specific questionnaires and measurement scales should be used in future studies.
amnioinfusion is associated with substantive improvements in perinatal outcome only in settings where facilities for perinatal surveillance are limited. it is not clear whether the benefits are due to dilution of meconium or relief of oligohydramnios. in settings with standard peripartum surveillance, some non-substantive outcomes were improved in the initial analysis, but sensitivity analysis excluding trials with greater risk of bias eliminated these differences. amnioinfusion is either ineffective in this setting, or its effects are masked by other strategies to optimise neonatal outcome. the trials reviewed are too small to address the possibility of rare but serious maternal adverse effects of amnioinfusion.
there was insufficient evidence of mechanical dilatation of the cervix at non-labour caesarean section for reducing postoperative morbidity. further randomised controlled trials with adequate methodological quality comparing intraoperative cervical dilatation using a finger, sponge forceps or other instrument during non-labour caesarean section versus no mechanical dilatation for reducing postoperative morbidity are needed.
current evidence is insufficient to indicate whether oximes are harmful or beneficial. the who recommended regimen (30 mg/kg pralidoxime chloride bolus followed by 8 mg/kg/hr infusion) is not supported. further rcts are required to examine other strategies and regimens. there are many theoretical and practical reasons why oximes may not be useful, particularly for late presentations of dimethyl op and those with a large excess of op that simply re-inhibits reactivated enzymes. future studies should screen for patient sub-groups that may benefit and may need flexible dosing strategies as clinical effectiveness and doses may depend on the type of op.
although neuroprotective agents are intended to act as pharmacological antagonists to prevent cell death, this trial did not provide evidence that they are effective in preventing retinal ganglion cell death, and thus preserving vision in people with oag. further clinical research is needed to determine whether neuroprotective agents may be beneficial for individuals with oag. such research should focus outcomes important to patients, such as preservation of vision, and how these outcomes relate to cell death and optic nerve damage. since oag is a chronic, progressive disease with variability in symptoms, rcts designed to measure the effectiveness of neuroprotective agents would require long-term follow up (more than four years) in order to detect clinically meaningful effects.
one year after its application, emd significantly improved pal levels (1.1 mm) and ppd reduction (0.9 mm) when compared to a placebo or control, however, the high degree of heterogeneity observed among trials suggests that results have to be interpreted with great caution. in addition, a sensitivity analysis indicated that the overall treatment effect might be overestimated. the actual clinical advantages of using emd are unknown. with the exception of significantly more postoperative complications in the gtr group, there was no evidence of clinically important differences between gtr and emd. bone substitutes may be associated with less rec than emd.
there is a need for well designed, adequately powered phase iii trials assessing the effect of sirt when used with modern combination chemotherapy regimens. further studies are also needed for patients with refractory disease with a particular focus on the impact on quality of life.
there is weak evidence that it may be advantageous, for dentists providing a complete denture service, to prescribe prosthetic posterior teeth with cusps to improve patient satisfaction compared to providing cuspless teeth. however, this conclusion may only be made tentatively until further well conducted trials comparing different occlusal schemes for complete dentures are undertaken.
there is limited evidence that propentofylline might benefit cognition, global function and activities of daily living of people with alzheimer's disease and/or vascular dementia. the meta-analyses reported here are far from satisfactory as a summary of the efficacy of propentofylline, considering the unpublished information on another 1200 patients in randomized trials that exists. unfortunately aventis has been unwilling to correspond with the authors, significantly limiting the scope of this review.
treatment with udca and/or antibiotics to prevent clogging of biliary stents in patients with malignant stricture of the biliary tract cannot be recommended routinely on the basis of the existing randomised clinical trials. further trials are needed with rigorous methodology and sufficient statistical power.
prophylactic administration of a1pi did not reduce the risk of cld at 36 weeks or long term adverse developmental outcomes in preterm neonates.
there is insufficient high quality evidence with regard to the most effective adhesive for attaching orthodontic bands to molar teeth. further rcts are required.
we did not find strong evidence that education reduced all cause mortality, cardiac morbidity, revascularisation or hospitalisation compared to control. there was some evidence to suggest that education may improve hrqofl and reduce overall healthcare costs. whilst our findings are generally supportive of current guidelines that cr should include not only exercise and psychological interventions, further research into education is needed.
flavanol-rich chocolate and cocoa products may have a small but statistically significant effect in lowering blood pressure by 2-3 mm hg in the short term. our findings are limited by the heterogeneity between trials, which was explored by univariate meta-regression and subgroup analyses. subgroup meta-analysis of trials using a flavanol-free control group revealed a significant blood pressure reducing effect of cocoa, whereas analysis of trials using a low-flavanol control product did not. while it appears that shorter trials of 2 weeks duration were more effective, analysis may be confounded by type of control and unblinding of participants, as the majority of 2-week trials also used a flavanol-free control and unblinding of participants. results of these and other subgroup analyses based on, for example, age of participants, should be interpreted with caution and need to be confirmed or refuted in trials using direct randomized comparison. long-term trials investigating the effect of cocoa products are needed to determine whether or not blood pressure is reduced on a chronic basis by daily ingestion of cocoa. furthermore, long-term trials investigating the effect of cocoa on clinical outcomes are also needed to assess whether cocoa has an effect on cardiovascular events and to assess potential adverse effects associated with chronic ingestion of cocoa products.
this review highlights a paucity of data on the use of bmp in fracture healing as well as considerable industry involvement in currently available evidence. there is limited evidence to suggest that bmp may be more effective than controls for acute tibial fracture healing, however, the use of bmp for treating nonunion remains unclear. the limited available economic evidence indicates that bmp treatment for acute open tibial fractures may be more favourable economically when used in patients with the most severe fractures.
the previous version of this review showed that exercise training improved exercise capacity in the short term in patients with mild to moderate heart failure when compared to usual care. this updated review provides evidence that in a similar population of patients, exercise does not increase the risk of all-cause mortality and may reduce heart failure-related hospital admissions. exercise training may offer important improvements in patients' health-related quality of life.
behavioural and cognitive-behavioural group-based parenting interventions are effective and cost-effective for improving child conduct problems, parental mental health and parenting skills in the short term. the cost of programme delivery was modest when compared with the long-term health, social, educational and legal costs associated with childhood conduct problems. further research is needed on the long-term assessment of outcomes.
in reversing first rejection, any antibody is better than steroid and also prevents graft loss, but subsequent rejection and patient survival are not significantly different. in reversing steroid-resistant rejection the effects of different antibodies are also not significantly different. given the clinical problem caused by acute rejection, data are very sparse, and clinically important differences in outcomes between widely used interventions have not been excluded. standardised reproducible outcome criteria are needed.
the findings of this systematic review neither confirm nor refute the utility of games as a teaching strategy for health professionals. there is a need for additional high-quality research to explore the impact of educational games on patient and performance outcomes.
we found limited evidence that the use of virtual reality and interactive video gaming may be beneficial in improving arm function and adl function when compared with the same dose of conventional therapy. there was insufficient evidence to reach conclusions about the effect of virtual reality and interactive video gaming on grip strength or gait speed. it is unclear at present which characteristics of virtual reality are most important and it is unknown whether effects are sustained in the longer term. furthermore, there are currently very few studies evaluating the use of commercial gaming consoles (such as the nintendo wii).
there is currently insufficient evidence from randomised trials on the effects of nitric oxide donors, l-arginine, or nitric oxide synthase-inhibitors in patients with acute stroke to recommend their use. a large controlled trial of glyceryl trinitrate patches is underway.
preliminary evidence from this review suggests that both diet and exercise together and diet alone help women to lose weight after childbirth. nevertheless, it may be preferable to lose weight through a combination of diet and exercise as this improves maternal cardiorespiratory fitness and preserves fat-free mass, while diet alone reduces fat-free mass. this needs confirmation in large trials. for women who are breastfeeding, more evidence is required to confirm whether diet or exercise, or both, is not detrimental for either mother or baby. [note: the 23 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
structured telephone support and telemonitoring are effective in reducing the risk of all-cause mortality and chf-related hospitalisations in patients with chf; they improve quality of life, reduce costs, and evidence-based prescribing.
there is evidence to suggest that lmwh may be effective for the treatment of active uc. when administered by extended colon-release tablets, lmwh was more effective than placebo for treating outpatients with mild to moderate disease. this benefit needs to be confirmed by further randomized controlled studies. the same benefits were not seen when lmwh was administered subcutaneously at lower doses. there is no evidence to support the use of ufh for the treatment of active uc. a further trial of ufh in patients with mild disease may also be justified. any benefit found would need to be weighed against a possible increased risk of rectal bleeding in patients with active uc.
nocturnal-nippv at home for at least three months in hypercapnic patients with stable copd had no consistent clinically or statistically significant effect on gas exchange, exercise tolerance, hrqol, lung function, respiratory muscle strength or sleep efficiency. meta-analysis of the two new long-term studies did not show significant improvements in blood gases, hrqol or lung function after 12 months of nippv. however, the small sample sizes of these studies preclude a definite conclusion regarding the effects of nippv in copd.
our results question the beneficial effects of milk thistle for patients with alcoholic and/or hepatitis b or c virus liver diseases and highlight the lack of high-quality evidence to support this intervention. adequately conducted and reported randomised clinical trials on milk thistle versus placebo are needed.
the finding of a reduction in risk of invasive fungal infection in very low birth weight infants treated with oral/topical non-absorbed antifungal prophylaxis should be interpreted cautiously because of methodological weaknesses in the included trials. further large randomised controlled trials in current neonatal practice settings are needed to resolve this uncertainty. these trials might compare oral/topical non-absorbed antifungal agents with placebo, with each other, or with systemic antifungal agents and should include an assessment of effect on long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes.
there has been no research into the use of velnacrine as a cognitive enhancer in the treatment of alzheimer's disease since 1994. the fda peripheral and cns drug advisory board voted unanimously against recommending approval. this review shows the toxic nature of velnacrine, and provides no evidence of efficacy. there are no grounds for further research into velnacrine.
there is limited evidence to support the use of material incentives to improve return rates for tuberculosis diagnostic test results and adherence to antituberculosis preventive therapy. the data are currently limited to trials among predominantly male drug users, homeless, and prisoner subpopulations in the usa, and therefore the results are not easily generalised to the wider adult population, or to low- and middle-income countries, where the tuberculosis burden is highest. further high-quality studies are needed to assess both the costs and effectiveness of incentives to improve adherence to long-term treatment of tuberculosis.
nystatin cannot be recommended for prophylaxis or treatment of candida infections in immunodepressed patients.
the use of restrictive as compared to liberal haemoglobin thresholds in infants of very low birth weight results in modest reductions in exposure to transfusion and in haemoglobin levels. restrictive practice does not appear to have a significant impact on death or major morbidities at first hospital discharge or at follow-up. however, given the uncertainties of these conclusions, it would be prudent to avoid haemoglobin levels below the lower limits tested here. further trials are required to clarify the impact of transfusion practice on long term outcome.
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of injection therapy in subacute and chronic low-back pain. however, it cannot be ruled out that specific subgroups of patients may respond to a specific type of injection therapy.
analysis across the included studies found no consistently significant benefit for the 'new' interventions compared to standard services for street-connected children and young people. these latter interventions, however, have not been rigorously evaluated, especially in the context of lmics. robustly evaluating the interventions would enable better recommendations to be made for service delivery. there is a need for future research in lmics that includes children who are on the streets due to urbanisation, war or migration and who may be vulnerable to risks such as trafficking.
antiplatelet therapy with aspirin 160 mg to 300 mg daily, given orally (or by nasogastric tube or per rectum in patients who cannot swallow), and started within 48 hours of onset of presumed ischaemic stroke reduces the risk of early recurrent ischaemic stroke without a major risk of early haemorrhagic complications and improves long-term outcome.
the results of this review are inconclusive. the review raises important methodological issues. there is a need for an rct which needs to be well-designed in terms of adequate randomisation allocation, blinding, power and long-term follow up. results need to be standardised to a consistent method of reporting, in order to validate the pooling of results from multiple trials.
routine use of oxytocin or any other uterotonics with normal saline via umbilical vein injection is not recommended until new evidence is available. further research should be conducted to show effectiveness of oxytocin with normal saline via umbilical vein injection.
postoperative injections of 5-fu are now rarely used as a planned series but are increasingly used on an ad hoc basis. this presumably reflects an aspect of the treatment that is unacceptable to both patients and doctors. none of the trials reported on the participants' perspective of care which constitutes a serious omission for an invasive treatment such as this.
there is insufficient data to support or reject the use of glucocorticosteroids for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. it may be appropriate to consider a large prospective randomised clinical trial on this topic.
no single treatment was found to be effective and therefore the results remain inconclusive in regard to the best systemic intervention for ras. this is likely to reflect the poor methodological rigour of trials, and lack of studies for certain drugs, rather than the true effect of the intervention. it is also recognised that in clinical practice, individual drugs appear to work for individual patients and so the interventions are likely to be complex in nature. in addition, it is acknowledged that systemic interventions are often reserved for those patients who have been unresponsive to topical treatments, and therefore may represent a select group of patients.
no adequately controlled trials could be found to support the use of benzodiazepines in the treatment of non-alcohol withdrawal related delirium among hospitalised patients, and at this time benzodiazepines cannot be recommended for the control of this condition. because of the scarcity of trials with randomization of patients, placebo control, and adequate concealment of allocation of subjects, it is clear that further research is required to determine the role of benzodiazepines in the treatment of non-alcohol withdrawal related delirium.
when all trials are considered, taxane-containing regimens appear to improve overall survival, time to progression and overall response in women with metastatic breast cancer. the degree of heterogeneity encountered indicates that taxane-containing regimens are more effective than some, but not all non-taxane-containing regimens.
the quality of available evidence is low and not suitable for drawing conclusions about the effect of folic acid on fragile x syndrome patients. it consists of few studies with small samples of patients, all of them male, with little statistical power to detect anything other than huge effects.
this review found preliminary data in support of the efficacy of topical calendula for prophylaxis of acute dermatitis during radiotherapy and traumeel s mouthwash in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced stomatitis. these trials need replicating. there is no convincing evidence for the efficacy of homeopathic medicines for other adverse effects of cancer treatments. further research is required.
gh therapy can increase short-term growth and improve (near) final height. increases in height are such that treated individuals remain relatively short when compared with peers of normal stature. large, multicentre rcts are required which should focus on final height and address quality of life and cost issues.
evidence of the effects of baclofen, progabide, sodium valproate, or thip for people with antipsychotic-induced td is inconclusive and unconvincing. any possible benefits are likely to be outweighed by the adverse effects associated with their use.
at iii cannot be recommended for critically ill patients based on the available evidence. a randomized controlled trial of at iii, without adjuvant heparin, with prespecified inclusion criteria and good bias protection is needed.
comparative research on contraceptive counseling for hiv-positive women has been limited. we found little innovation in the behavioral interventions. our ability to make statements about overall results is hampered by varied study designs, interventions, and outcome assessments. the quality of evidence was moderate. since some of these studies were conducted, improvements in hiv treatment have influenced the fertility intentions of hiv-positive people. the family planning field needs better ways to help women choose an appropriate contraceptive and continue using that chosen method. women with hiv may have special concerns regarding family planning. research could focus on assessing the woman's needs and training providers to address those issues rather than delivering standardized information.
there have been significant benefits demonstrated with pre-operative administration of ie nutrition in some high quality trials. however, bias was identified which may limit the generalizability of these results to all gi surgical candidates and the data needs to be placed in context with other recent innovations in surgical management (eg-eras). some unwanted effects have also been reported with components of ie nutrition in critical care patients and it is unknown whether there would be detrimental effects by administering ie nutrition to patients who could require critical care support after their surgery. the studies evaluating pn demonstrated that the provision of pn to predominantly malnourished surgical candidates reduced post-operative complications; however, these data may not be applicable to current clinical practice, not least because they have involved a high degree of 'hyperalimentation'. trials evaluating enteral or oral nutrition were inconclusive and further studies are required to select gi surgical patients for these nutritional interventions.
the review included only one well-designed randomised clinical trial that showed beneficial effect of cervical pessary in reducing preterm birth in women with a short cervix. there is a need for more trials in different settings (developed and developing countries), and with different risk factors including multiple pregnancy.
this review showed insufficient evidence to judge whether once or twice daily doses of amoxicillin, with or without clavulanate, were comparable with three or four daily doses for the treatment of aom. the evidence appears to be biased and therefore no firm conclusions can be drawn.
the effectiveness of interventions designed to prevent patient injuries from their beds (including bed rails, low height beds and bed exit alarms) remains uncertain. the available evidence shows no significant increase or decrease in the rate of injuries with the use of low height beds and bed exit alarms. limitations of the two included studies include lack of blinding and insufficient power. no randomised controlled trials of bed rails were identified. future reports should fully describe the standard care received by the control group.
due to the generally low quality or limited applicability of the studies identified, the results of this review are inconclusive. on the whole, the data seem to suggest that where adequate out-patient/home management of type 1 diabetes in children at diagnosis can be provided, this does not lead to any disadvantages in terms of metabolic control, acute diabetic complications and hospitalisations, psychosocial variables and behaviour, or total costs.
there is insufficient evidence from the currently available rcts to conclude whether 'once a day' or 'multiple doses a day' regimen of gentamicin is superior in treating proven neonatal sepsis. however, data suggests that pharmacokinetic properties of 'once a day' gentamicin regimen are superior to 'multiple doses a day' regimen in that it achieves higher peak levels while avoiding toxic trough levels. there is no change in nephrotoxicity or auditory toxicity. based on this assessment of pharmacokinetics, 'once a day regimen' may be superior in treating neonatal sepsis in neonates greater than 32 weeks gestation.
when conventional ptca is feasible, ptcra appears to confer no additional benefits. there is limited published evidence and no long-term data to support the routine use of ptcra in in-stent re-stenosis. compared to angioplasty alone, ptcra/ptca did not result in a higher incidence of major adverse cardiac events, but patients were more likely to experience vascular spasm, perforation and transient vessel occlusion. in certain circumstances (e.g. patients ineligible for cardiac surgery, those with architecturally complex lesions, or those with lesions that fail ptca), ptcra may achieve satisfactory re-vascularisation in subsequent procedures.
there is currently no evidence to support or refute the use of any treatment to reduce infectious complications after liver resections. further well designed trials with low risk of systematic error and low risk of random errors are necessary.
there is a lack of evidence around the use of hrt in women with type 1 diabetes. the one study that has been undertaken in this area is underpowered. more rcts are required in the area to examine the impact of hrt on glycaemic control and cardiovascular outcomes.
intrapleural fibrinolytic therapy confers significant benefit in reducing the requirement for surgical intervention for patients in the early studies included in this review but not in the more recently published maskell study. the reasons for this difference are uncertain. separate subgroup analysis of proven loculated/septated effusions from the available data in our meta-analysis suggests a potential overall treatment benefit with fibrinolytics, but these results should be treated with caution as the data are incomplete and the benefit is not significant in the subgroup of high quality trials (cochrane grade a). intrapleural fibrinolytics have not been shown to significantly increase adverse events, but the confidence interval is too wide to firmly exclude this possibility.
pemetrexed disodium in combination with cisplatin and with folic acid and vitamin b12 supplementation may improve survival when used in combination with cisplatin in good performance status patients. further studies including patients with poor performance status are needed in order to generalise the treatment findings. further studies are also needed into the optimum chemotherapy, and a clear definition of what constitutes best supportive care.
the single study on non-intubated children with severe acute asthma did not show significant benefit and does not support the case studies and observational reports showing benefits of ketamine in both non-ventilated and ventilated children. there were no significant side effects of ketamine. we could not find any trials on ventilated children. to prove that ketamine is an effective treatment for acute asthma in children, there is need for sufficiently powered randomised trials of high methodological quality with objective outcome measures of clinical importance. future trials should also explore different doses of ketamine and its role in children needing ventilation because of severe acute asthma.
pdv significantly prevents hepatitis b events. rv seems to be able to elicit similar protective anti-hbs levels. the intramuscular route with 20 µg rv was significantly more effective compared with the intradermal route with 2 µg rv as was the standard schedule compared with a rapid schedule and deltoid intramuscular injection compared with the gluteal intramuscular injection. it is unclear if booster vaccination of non-responders offers higher anti-hbs seroconversion and hepatitis b vaccine prevents the infection of hepatitis b mutants in health-care workers.
randomised studies are possible in this field. the use of drama therapy for schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like illnesses should continue to be under evaluation as its benefits, or harms, are unclear.
this systematic review found a significant treatment effect using modified cimt in a single trial. a positive trend favouring cimt and forced use was also demonstrated. given the limited evidence, the use of cimt, modified cimt and forced use should be considered experimental in children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy. further research using adequately powered rcts, rigorous methodology and valid and reliable outcome measures is essential to provide higher level support of the effectiveness of cimt for children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy.
laam appears more effective than methadone at reducing heroin use. more laam patients than methadone ceased their allocated medication during the studies, but many transferred to methadone and so the significance of this is unclear. there was no difference in safety observed, although there was not enough evidence to comment on uncommon adverse events.
there is evidence from randomised controlled studies that glucocorticoid corticosteroid therapy in duchenne muscular dystrophy improves muscle strength and function in the short-term (six months to two years). the most effective prednisolone regime appears to be 0.75 mg/kg/day, given daily. in the short term, adverse effects were significantly more common but not clinically severe. long-term benefits and hazards of glucocorticoid treatment cannot be evaluated from the currently published randomised studies. non-randomised studies support the conclusions of functional benefits but also identify clinically significant adverse effects of long-term treatment. these benefits and adverse effects have implications for future research studies and clinical practice.
prolonged thromboprophylaxis with lmwh significantly reduces the risk of vte compared to thromboprophylaxis during hospital admittance only, without increasing bleeding complications after major abdominal or pelvic surgery.
these results suggest that sphincterotomy for biliary sphincter of oddi dysfunction appears effective in those patients with an elevated sphincter of oddi basal pressure (>40 mmhg), but is no better than placebo in those patients with a normal basal pressure. the results reported in this review must be interpreted with caution as there are only two studies and one of the reviewers (toouli) has been an author in both studies. further trials by independent groups are recommended.
vitamin e supplementation in preterm infants reduced the risk of intracranial hemorrhage but increased the risk of sepsis. in very low birth weight infants, vitamin e increased the risk of sepsis, and reduced the risk of severe retinopathy and blindness among those examined. evidence does not support the routine use of vitamin e supplementation by intravenous route at high doses or aiming at serum tocopherol levels greater than 3.5 mg/dl.
we found silver level evidence (www.cochranemsk.org) concerning the beneficial effects of mineral baths compared to no treatment. of all other balneological treatments no clear effects were found. however, the scientific evidence is weak because of the poor methodological quality and the absence of an adequate statistical analysis and data presentation. therefore, the noted "positive findings" should be viewed with caution.
experimental evidence to evaluate the benefits and risks in preterm infants of early discharge from hospital with home gavage feeding compared with later discharge upon attainment of full sucking feeds is limited to the results of one small quasi-randomised controlled trial. high quality trials with concealed allocation, complete follow-up of all randomised infants and adequate sample size are needed before practice recommendations can be made.
doxapram can improve blood gas exchange over the first few hours of treatment. newer techniques such as non-invasive ventilation may prove to be more effective, although there is no randomised trial evidence to this effect.
there is insufficient evidence from well-controlled trials to support the use of postural management for breech presentation. the numbers of women studied to date remain relatively small. further research is needed.
although the inclusion criteria for this systematic review set a study design threshold higher than that of previous reviews, the results mirror those of earlier reviews but also highlights the tendency of the perceived effectiveness of popular interventions to outstrip their evidence base. whilst the results of individual studies generally indicate that tfc is a promising intervention for children and youth experiencing mental health problems, behavioural problems or problems of delinquency, the evidence base is less robust than that usually reported.
antistaphylococcal immunoglobulins (inh a-21 and altastaph) are not recommended for prevention of staphylococcal infections in preterm or vlbw neonates. further research to investigate the efficacy of other products such as pagibaximab is needed.
current evidence is insufficient to support pycnogenol® use for the treatment of any chronic disorder. well-designed, adequately powered trials are needed to establish the value of this treatment.
there is insufficient information on which to base decisions about the role of cox inhibition for women in preterm labour. further well designed trials are needed. [note: the 11 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
heparin was associated with a significant reduction of death at 24 months but not 12 months. it was also associated with a reduction in venous thromboembolism but based on the rcts in this review it had no significant effect on major bleeding, minor bleeding or qol. future research should further investigate the survival benefit of different types of anticoagulants in patients with different types and stages of cancer. the decision for a patient with cancer to start heparin therapy for survival benefit should balance the benefits and downsides and integrate the patient's values and preferences.
vitamin b1 is shown to be an effective treatment for dysmenorrhoea taken at 100 mg daily, although this conclusion is tempered slightly by its basis on only one large rct. results suggest that magnesium is a promising treatment for dysmenorrhoea. it is unclear what dose or regime of treatment should be used for magnesium therapy, due to variations in the included trials, therefore no strong recommendation can be made until further evaluation is carried out. overall there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of any of the other herbal and dietary therapies considered in this review for the treatment of primary or secondary dysmenorrhoea.
we were unable to demonstrate whether convective modalities (either hf, hdf or afb) have significant advantages over hd with regard to clinically important outcomes of mortality, dialysis-related hypotension and hospitalisation. more adequately-powered good quality rcts assessing clinically important outcomes (mortality, hospitalisation, quality of life) are needed.
antihypertensive drugs used in the treatment of adults (primary prevention) with mild hypertension (systolic bp 140-159 mmhg and/or diastolic bp 90-99 mmhg) have not been shown to reduce mortality or morbidity in rcts. treatment caused 9% of patients to discontinue treatment due to adverse effects. more rcts are needed in this prevalent population to know whether the benefits of treatment exceed the harms.
we found no statistically significant effect of heparin or vka on the outcomes of interest. however, the findings did not rule out clinically important benefits and harms. patients with cancer with cvcs considering anticoagulation should balance the possible benefit of reduced thromboembolic complications with the possible harms and burden of anticoagulants.
the evidence supporting hcg supplementation to prevent rm remains equivocal. a well-designed randomised controlled trial of adequate power and methodological quality is required to determine whether hcg is beneficial in rm.
the findings of this review provide some support for the use of group-based parenting programmes to improve the emotional and behavioural adjustment of children with a maximum mean age of three years eleven months. there is, insufficient evidence to reach firm conclusions regarding the role that such programmes might play in the primary prevention of such problems. there are also limited data available concerning the long-term effectiveness of these programmes. further research is needed.
ranibizumab and pegaptanib sodium have shown promise in the short-term treatment of non-ischemic crvo-me. however, effectiveness and safety data from larger rcts with follow up beyond six months are not yet available. there are no rct data on anti-vegf agents in ischemic crvo-me. the use of anti-vegf agents to treat this condition therefore remains experimental.
we found relatively few studies of pricing policies. the majority of the studies dealt with reference pricing. they had few methodological limitations. based on the evidence in this review, mostly from senior citizens in british columbia, canada, reference drug pricing can reduce third party drug expenditures by inducing a shift in drug use towards less expensive drugs. we found no evidence of adverse effects on health and no clear evidence of increased health care utilisation. the analysis and reporting of the effects on patient drug expenditures were limited in the included studies and administration costs were not reported.
music therapy as an addition to standard care helps people with schizophrenia to improve their global state, mental state (including negative symptoms) and social functioning if a sufficient number of music therapy sessions are provided by qualified music therapists. further research should especially address the long-term effects of music therapy, dose-response relationships, as well as the relevance of outcomes measures in relation to music therapy.
according to moderate quality evidence, mycophenolate mofetil did not produce significant benefit in terms of reducing need for intravenous immunoglobulin or improving muscle strength. trials of other immunosuppressants should be undertaken.
use of short-acting beta-2 agonists on a regular basis for at least seven days in stable copd is associated with improvements in post bronchodilator lung function and a decrease in breathlessness. patients are far more likely to prefer treatment with beta-2 agonists than placebo, and less likely to drop out from such treatment. none of the studies included in this review reported sufficient data or were of sufficient length or size in order to provide reliable information on adverse effects. therefore large scale, parallel, longer term studies would be needed to investigate the effect of treatment with regular inhaled beta-2 agonists on mortality, disease progression and side effects. newer, long acting bronchodilators (including long-acting beta-2 agonists) are currently available and they may be more practical and/or effective in these patients. however, this review indicates that treatment with these older, inexpensive drugs is beneficial in patients with copd.
there is a lack of robust evidence to inform on the timing of mobilisation, and specifically on the use of early mobilisation, after non-surgical or surgical treatment for adults with elbow fractures. there is a need for high quality, well-reported, adequately powered, randomised controlled trials that compare early versus delayed mobilisation in people with commonly-occurring elbow fractures, treated with or without surgery. trials should use validated upper limb function scales, and assessment should be both short-term (to monitor recovery and early complications) and long-term (at least one year).
cerebrolysin may have positive effects on cognitive function and global function in elderly patients with vascular dementia of mild to moderate severity, but there is still insufficient evidence to recommend cerebrolysin as a routine treatment for vascular dementia due to the limited number of included trials, wide variety of treatment durations and short-term follow-up in most of the trials.
there are insufficient data to say anything conclusive about the effect of position for the second stage of labour for women with epidural analgesia. women with an epidural should be encouraged to use whatever position they find comfortable in the second stage of labour. future research should involve large trials of positions that women can maintain and predefined endpoints. one large trial is ongoing.
in general, all glutamatergic drugs appeared to be ineffective in further reducing positive symptoms of the disease when added to the existing antipsychotic treatment. glycine and d-serine may somewhat improve negative symptoms when added to regular antipsychotic medication, but the results were not fully consistent and data are too few to allow any firm conclusions. many participants in the included trials were treatment-resistant which may have reduced treatment response. additional research on glutamatergic mechanisms of schizophrenia is needed.
not enough evidence to support the use of cannabinoids in treating tics and obsessive compulsive behaviour in people with tourette's syndrome.
an improvement in asthma symptoms, exacerbations and side effects of ciclesonide versus budesonide and fluticasone could be neither demonstrated nor refuted and the trade-off between benefits and harms of using ciclesonide instead of budesonide or fluticasone is unclear. the resource use or costs of different ics should therefore also be considered in final decision making. longer-term superiority trials are needed to identify the usefulness and safety of ciclesonide compared to other ics. additionally these studies should be powered for patient relevant outcomes (exacerbations, asthma symptoms, quality of life and side effects). there is a need for studies comparing ciclesonide once daily with other ics twice daily to assess the advantages of ciclesonide being a pro-drug that can be administered once daily with possibly increased adherence leading to increased control of asthma and fewer side effects.
the effectiveness of local corticosteroid injections was studied in only two small randomized controlled trials of poor methodological quality. both studies showed better short-term effects of corticosteroid injection combined with lidocaine compared to lidocaine alone on the treatment success outcome. in one study the effects of corticosteroid injections lasted up to four months. no adverse effects were observed. the available evidence for the effectiveness of intra-tendon sheath corticosteroid injection for trigger finger can be graded as a silver level evidence for superiority of corticosteroid injections combined with lidocaine over injections with lidocaine alone.
this systematic review has not found sufficient evidence to support or refute the effectiveness of early versus late enteral nutrition support in adults with burn injury. the trials showed some promising results that would suggest early enteral nutrition support may blunt the hypermetabolic response to thermal injury, but this is insufficient to provide clear guidelines for practice. further research incorporating larger sample sizes and rigorous methodology that utilises valid and reliable outcome measures, is essential.
a small but significant effect of pharmacotherapy (not psychotherapy) on treating depression and reducing depressive symptoms was found, as was a significant increase in adverse events. more research is required before recommendations can be made about the routine use of such treatments.
in the absence of evidence that advice to alter salt intake during pregnancy has any beneficial effect for prevention of pre-eclampsia or any other outcome, salt consumption during pregnancy should remain a matter of personal preference. [note: the citation in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
since the last version of this review no new studies were found. from the one available rct we found insufficient evidence that pre-treatment surgical para-aortic lymph node assessment for locally advanced cervical cancer is beneficial, and it may actually have an adverse effect on survival. however, this conclusion is based on analysis of a small single trial and therefore definitive guidance or recommendations for clinical practice cannot be made. therefore, the decision to offer surgical pre-treatment assessment of para-aortic lymph nodes in locally advanced cervical cancer needs to be individualised. the uncertainty regarding any impact on survival from pre-treatment para-aortic lymph node assessment should be discussed openly with the women.
psychological interventions appear to be effective in improving survival at 12 months but not at longer-term follow-up, and they are effective in reducing psychological symptoms only in some of the outcomes assessed in women with metastatic breast cancer. however, findings of the review should be interpreted with caution as there is a relative lack of data in this field, and the included trials had reporting or methodological weaknesses and were heterogeneous in terms of interventions and outcome measures.
there is little evidence of benefit in terms of pain relief of any of the interventions considered in this study during or immediately after hsg. however, there is limited evidence of pain reduction 30 minutes after the procedure. further rcts should consider the role of non steroidal antiinflammatories (nsaids) and intrauterine anaesthetic during hsg.
there are still too few randomised controlled trials to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of cognitive behaviour therapy for male perpetrators of domestic violence.
we conclude that for the critical outcomes of virologic response and serious adverse events initial art regimens containing tdf are equivalent to those containing azt. however, tdf is superior to azt in terms of immunologic response and adherence and more frequent emergence of resistance. how much the other drugs in the regimens contributed to these findings is unclear, and true head-to-head trials are still warranted. the role of each drug in initial art will likely be driven by their specific toxicities.
current evidence suggests that intranasal corticosteroids may significantly improve nasal obstruction symptoms in children with moderate to severe adenoidal hypertrophy, and this improvement may be associated with a reduction in adenoid size. the long-term efficacy of intranasal corticosteroids in these patients remains to be defined.
there is no evidence for a beneficial effect of benzodiazepines for the relief of breathlessness in patients with advanced cancer and copd. there is a slight but non-significant trend towards a beneficial effect but the overall effect size is small. benzodiazepines caused more drowsiness as an adverse effect compared to placebo, but less compared to morphine. these results justify considering benzodiazepines as a second or third-line treatment within an individual therapeutic trial, when opioids and non-pharmacological measures have failed to control breathlessness. although a few good quality studies were included in this review, there is still a further need for well-conducted and adequately powered studies.
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether magnesium is beneficial or harmful for the treatment or prevention of alcohol withdrawal syndrome.
statin treatment is an efficient lipid-lowering therapy in children with familial hypercholesterolemia. it seems to be safe in the short term but long-term safety is unknown. children treated with statins should be carefully followed up by their pediatricians. large long-term randomized controlled trials are needed to establish the long-term safety of statins in children.
there is weak evidence from the results of one randomised controlled trial including 60 subjects that patients are generally less satisfied with preprosthetic surgery and a conventional denture than with an implant retained denture. there is a need for more well designed trials comparing the success and cost-effectiveness of preprosthetic surgery and implant supported dentures. such trials should be reported according to the consort guidelines (www.consort-statement.org/). however, since preprosthetic surgery is considered to be an obsolete treatment nowadays, almost completely replaced by dental implants, it may be that new rcts on this topic will not be designed.
we found moderate-quality evidence that nutritional supplementation promotes significant weight gain among patients with copd, especially if malnourished. nourished patients may not respond to the same degree to supplemental feeding. we also found a significant change from baseline in fat-free mass index/fat-free mass, fat mass/fat mass index, mamc (as a measure of lean body mass), six-minute walk test and a significant improvement in skinfold thickness (as measure of fat mass, end score) for all patients. in addition, there were significant improvements in respiratory muscle strength (mip and mep) and overall hrqol as measured by sgrq in malnourished patients with copd. these results differ from previous reviews and should be considered in the management of malnourished patients with copd.
little evidence is available from the included randomised controlled trials to evaluate different agent forms, concentrations and methods of skin preparation for preventing infection following caesarean section. therefore, it is not yet clear what sort of skin preparation may be most efficient for preventing postcaesarean wound and surgical site infection. there is a need for high-quality, properly designed randomised controlled trials with larger sample sizes in this field. high priority questions include comparing types of antiseptic (especially iodine versus chlorhexidine), the timing and duration of applying the antiseptic (especially previous night versus day of surgery, and application methods (scrubbing, swabbing and draping).
although one trial did not contribute to efficacy results due to its duration, we found robust evidence in favour of a reduction in relapses and disability at 2 years in rrms patients treated with ntz. the drug was well tolerated. there are current significant safety concerns due to reporting of an increasing number of pml cases in patients treated with ntz. this review was unable to provide an up-to-date systematic assessment of the risk due to the maximum 2 year-duration of the trials included. an independent systematic review of the safety profile of ntz is warranted. ntz should be used only by skilled neurologists in ms centres under surveillance programs. all the data in this review came from trials supported by the pharmaceutical industry. in agreement with the cochrane collaboration policy, this may be considered a potential source of bias.
current evidence suggests that the use of doppler ultrasound in high-risk pregnancies reduced the risk of perinatal deaths and resulted in less obstetric interventions. the quality of the current evidence was not of high quality, therefore, the results should be interpreted with some caution. studies of high quality with follow-up studies on neurological development are needed.
the evidence from randomised studies suggests that muscle stretching, whether conducted before, after, or before and after exercise, does not produce clinically important reductions in delayed-onset muscle soreness in healthy adults.
medical day hospital care for the elderly appears to be more effective than no intervention but may have no clear advantage over other forms of comprehensive elderly medical services.
interventions tailored to prospectively identified barriers are more likely to improve professional practice than no intervention or dissemination of guidelines. however, the methods used to identify barriers and tailor interventions to address them need further development. research is required to determine the effectiveness of tailored interventions in comparison with other interventions.
there is no evidence from randomised trials to support cycle monitoring by ultrasound plus serum estradiol as more efficacious than cycle monitoring by ultrasound only on outcomes of live birth and pregnancy rates. a large well-designed randomised controlled trial is needed that reports on live birth rates and pregnancy, with economic evaluation of the costs involved and the views of the women undergoing cycle monitoring. a randomised trial with sufficiently large sample size to test the effects of different monitoring protocols on ohss, a rare outcome, will pose a great challenge. until such a trial is considered feasible, cycle monitoring by transvaginal ultrasound plus serum estradiol may need to be retained as a precautionary good practice point.
there is currently insufficient data to address the risk-benefit balance of using vgb versus cbz monotherapy for epilepsy. considering the high prevalence of visual field defects, reported in an existing systematic review of observational studies (maguire 2010), the prescribing of vgb monotherapy for epilepsy should be used with caution and not considered as a first-line choice. if necessary, a frequent assessment of visual field is needed. future research should focus on investigating the reasons for visual field defects and exploring the potential prevention strategies. moreover, future monotherapy studies of epilepsy should report results according to the recommendation of international league against epilepsy (ilae) commission, and methodological quality should be improved.
salt consumption during pregnancy should remain a matter of personal preference.
we found no evidence that the administration of prostaglandins to liver transplanted patients reduces the risk of death, primary non-function of the allograft, or liver re-transplantation. prostaglandins might reduce the risk of acute kidney failure requiring dialysis, but the quality of the evidence is considered only moderate due to high risk of bias in most of the included trials. moreover, there are risks of outcome measure reporting bias and random errors. therefore, further randomised, placebo-controlled trials are deemed necessary.
there is high-quality evidence from the two rcts that mobile phone text-messaging at weekly intervals is efficacious in enhancing adherence to art, compared to standard care. there is high quality evidence from one trial that weekly mobile phone text-messaging is efficacious in improving hiv viral load suppression. policy-makers should consider funding programs proposing to provide weekly mobile phone text-messaging as a means for promoting adherence to antiretroviral therapy. clinics and hospitals should consider implementing such programs. there is a need for large rcts of this intervention in adolescent populations, as well as in high-income countries.
we found that nebulised antibiotics, alone or in combination with oral antibiotics, were better than no treatment for early infection with pseudomonas aeruginosa. eradication may be sustained in the short term. overall, there is insufficient evidence from this review to state which antibiotic strategy should be used for the eradication of early pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cf.
the current evidence does not support the routine use of hcg in the treatment of threatened miscarriage.
this review failed to demonstrate the superiority of atosiban over betamimetics or placebo in terms of tocolytic efficacy or infant outcomes. the finding of an increase in infant deaths in one placebo controlled trial warrants caution. a recent cochrane review suggests that calcium channel blockers (mainly nifedipine) are associated with better neonatal outcome and fewer maternal side-effects than betamimetics. however, a randomised comparison of nifedipine with placebo is not available. further well-designed randomised controlled trials of tocolytic therapy are needed. such trials should incorporate a placebo arm. [note: the 24 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
though based on a limited amount of information, there is evidence that olanzapine may prevent further mood episodes in patients who have responded to olanzapine during an index manic or mixed episode and who have not previously had a satisfactory response to lithium or valproate. however, notwithstanding these positive results, the current evidence is stronger for lithium as first line maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder.
using propofol to achieve deliberate hypotension may improve the surgical field, but the effect is small. deliberate hypotension with propofol did not decrease tbl and operation time. rcts with good quality methodology and large sample size are required to investigate the effectiveness of deliberate hypotension with propofol for fess.
there is insufficient evidence to support strict glycaemic control versus conventional management (maintenance of glucose < 200 mg/dl) for the prevention of ssis. no trials were found that evaluated strict glycaemic control in the immediate pre-operative period or outside the setting of an intensive care unit. the trials were limited by small sample size, inconsistencies in the definitions of the outcome measures and methodological quality. further large randomised trials are required to address this question and may be most appropriately performed in patients at high risk for ssis.
the results of this meta-analysis support the therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant interferon alpha for the treatment of people with high-risk (ajcc tnm stage ii-iii) cutaneous melanoma in terms of both disease-free survival and, though to a lower extent, overall survival. interferon is also valid as a reference treatment in rcts investigating new therapeutic agents for the adjuvant treatment of this participant population. further investigation is required to select people who are most likely to benefit from this treatment.
there is no high quality evidence that electromagnetic therapy increases the rate of healing of venous leg ulcers, and further research is needed.
dec-medicated salt is an effective intervention when maintained with levels of coverage of at least 90% for at least six months. further studies are required to assess the effects of continuous low-dose, dec-medicated salt on adult worms, disease prevalence, and development of drug resistance.
there is some evidence to suggest that family therapy may be effective compared to treatment as usual in the short term. however, this is based on few trials that included only a small number of participants, all of which had issues regarding potential bias. there is insufficient evidence to be able to determine whether family therapy offers any advantage over other types of psychological interventions, or whether one type of family therapy is more effective than another. the field would benefit from a large, well-conducted trial.
the findings suggest interventions relating to hospital nurse staffing models may improve some patient outcomes, particularly the addition of specialist nursing and specialist support roles to the nursing workforce. interventions relating to hospital nurse staffing models may also improve staff-related outcomes, particularly the introduction of primary nursing and self-scheduling. however, these findings should be treated with extreme caution due to the limited evidence available from the research conducted to date.
the existing studies provided insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of exercise as a treatment for vasomotor menopausal symptoms, or whether exercise is more effective than hrt or yoga.
the strategy of switching to triple nucleoside regimens shows weak evidence of lower incidence of side effects and a higher incidence of virologic failure in the 3nrti group compared to controls. simplification with 3nrti holds the advantages of preserving other classes of antiretroviral drugs, to lower blood lipids, and to be cost effective and simple to administer.thus, simplification with triple nucleoside regimens azt + 3tc + abc should be still considered for individuals who are unable to tolerate or have contraindications to nnrti or pi based regimens. additional data are needed on longer-term efficacy of triple nrti regimens, particularly on the development of antiretroviral resistance. though studies in the current review were conducted between 2001 and 2010, the large majority of patients from studies analysed received old pi regimens (e.g., indinavir, ritonavir, nelfinavir, saquinavir) not longer recommended by international guidelines. since current guidelines recommend new "lipid -friendly" pi, future studies should compare regimens containing these news pis to triple nrti regimens. more realistically, however, there are opportunities to examine these issues in existing cohorts.
there is currently no convincing evidence to confirm or refute the practise of administering benzodiazepines as monotherapy or in combination with antipsychotics for the pharmacological treatment of schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like psychosis. low-quality evidence suggests that benzodiazepines are effective for very short-term sedation and could be considered for calming acutely agitated people with schizophrenia. measured by the overall attrition rate, the acceptability of benzodiazepine treatment appears to be adequate. adverse effects were generally poorly reported. high-quality future research projects with large sample sizes are required to clarify the evidence of benzodiazepine treatment in schizophrenia, especially regarding long-term augmentation strategies.
there is evidence that a topical intervention (rgd peptide matrix) reduced ulcer size in treated participants compared to controls. this evidence of efficacy is limited by the generally high risk of bias associated with these reports. we planned to analyse results according to general groups: pharmaceutical interventions (systemic and topical); and non-pharmaceutical interventions (surgical and non-surgical). however, we were unable to pool findings due to the heterogeneity in outcome definitions, and inconsistency between the unit of randomisation and the unit of analysis. this heterogeneity, along with a paucity of identified trials, prevented us performing any meta-analyses. this cochrane review provides some evidence for the effectiveness of one topical intervention - rgd peptide matrix. however, this intervention was assessed as having a high risk of bias due to inadequacies in the single trial report. other included studies were also assessed as having a high risk of bias. we recommend that readers interpret the trial results with caution. the safety profile of the all interventions was inconclusive.
prophylactic antibiotics administered preoperatively reduce the risk of ssi in patients undergoing surgery for breast cancer. further studies involving patients undergoing immediate breast reconstruction are needed as studies have identified this group as being at higher risk of infection than those who do not undergo immediate breast reconstruction.
there is no evidence that nonoxynol-9 protects against vaginal acquisition of hiv infection by women from men. there is evidence that it may do harm by increasing the frequency of genital lesions.
the data from the published trials suggest that there is insufficient evidence to support this treatment. these results were based on only two trials which had a very small number of participants. therefore evidence from larger randomised controlled trials is needed in order to provide adequate statistical power to assess the role of intramuscular mononuclear cell implantation in patients with cli.
this review did not provide assured evidence concerning the effectiveness of tcmhs in improving quality of life or rate of remission, alleviating the toxicity or side effects of chemotherapy, or reducing short-term mortality. limited, weak evidence showed that huachansu, aidi, fufangkushen, and shenqifuzheng improved leukopenia when used together with chemotherapy; and huachansu, aidi, and fufangkushen were of benefit for adverse events in the digestive system caused by chemotherapy. these tcmhs did not improve the rate of short-term remissions. large, well designed clinical trials are required urgently before any definite conclusions can be drawn about the value of tcmhs for advanced or late stage gastric cancer.
the limited number and small sample size of the included rcts restricts the confidence that can be attributed to these results. adequately powered rcts evaluating exercise programs specifically designed for people with symptomatic hip oa need to be conducted.
ribavirin seems without beneficial effects on serum virological response and liver-related morbidity or mortality, and significantly increased the risk of adverse reactions. ribavirin monotherapy seems significantly inferior to interferon monotherapy. the total number of included patients is small, and more trials are perhaps needed. the use of ribavirin monotherapy for chronic hepatitis c cannot be recommended outside randomised trials.
the results of this review confirm much that clinicians and recipients of care already know but aim to provide quantification to support clinical impression. chlorpromazine's global position as a 'benchmark' treatment for psychoses is not threatened by the findings of this review. chlorpromazine, in common use for half a century, is a well established but imperfect treatment. judicious use of this best available evidence should lead to improved evidence-based decision making by clinicians, carers and patients. please note the addition of 26 studies to awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
there is currently insufficient evidence from rcts to justify promotion of ultrasound-based clinical pathways in diagnosing patients with suspected blunt abdominal trauma.
evidence from this review is limited for decision making, since there was large heterogeneity in igb trials, regarding both methodological and clinical aspects. however, a co-adjuvant factor described by some authors in the loss and maintenance of weight has been the motivation and the encouragement to changing eating habits following a well-organized diet and a program of behavioural modification. the igb alone and the technique of positioning appear to be safe. despite the evidence for little additional benefit of the intragastric balloon in the loss of weight, its cost should be considered against a program of eating and behavioural modification.
topical pimecrolimus is less effective than moderate and potent corticosteroids and 0.1% tacrolimus. the therapeutic role of topical pimecrolimus is uncertain due to the absence of key comparisons with mild corticosteroids.
while a potential benefit of ultrasound for the treatment of acute fractures in adults cannot be ruled out, the currently available evidence from a set of clinically heterogeneous trials is insufficient to support the routine use of this intervention in clinical practice. future trials should record functional outcomes and follow-up all trial participants.
nebulised or inhaled salbutamol, or iv insulin-and-glucose are the first-line therapies for the management of emergency hyperkalaemia that are best supported by the evidence. their combination may be more effective than either alone, and should be considered when hyperkalaemia is severe. when arrhythmias are present, a wealth of anecdotal and animal data suggests that iv calcium is effective in treating arrhythmia. further studies of the optimal use of combination treatments and of the adverse effects of treatments are needed.
for patients with polycythaemia vera who have no clear indication or contraindication to aspirin therapy, available evidence suggests that the use of low-dose aspirin, when compared with no treatment, is associated with a statistically non-significant reduction in the risk of fatal thrombotic events and all-cause mortality, without an increased risk of major bleeding.
there is some evidence to support the effectiveness of community interventions in reducing the uptake of smoking in young people, but the evidence is not strong and contains a number of methodological flaws.
the use of gnrh analogues for 3 to 4 months prior to fibroid surgery reduce both uterine volume and fibroid size. they are beneficial in the correction of pre-operative iron deficiency anaemia, if present, and reduce intra-operative blood loss. if uterine size is such that a mid-line incision is planned, this can be avoided in many women with the use of gnrh analogues. for patients undergoing hysterectomy, a vaginal procedure is more likely following the use of these agents.
there is currently a lack of evidence on the effects of screening and treating h pylori in patients with parkinson's disease. there is limited evidence to suggest that h pylori eradication improves the absorption of levodopa and improves motor symptoms. results from an ongoing trial will inform the evidence base and will be incorporated in an update of this review. there is a need for well-conducted randomised controlled trials with standard outcome measures for motor symptoms and incorporating the costs of screening and treatment.
this systematic review has not revealed strong controlled evidence to support or refute the use of bta for the treatment of leg spasticity in cerebral palsy. ongoing randomised controlled trials are likely to provide useful data on the short term effects of bta for leg spasticity. future research should also assess the longer term use of bta. ideally studies should be pragmatic in their approach to dose and distribution of toxin to reflect practise. outcome measures assessing function and disability would give the most useful information.
the use of prophylactic vancomycin in low doses reduces the incidence of nosocomial sepsis in the neonate. the methodologies of these studies may have contributed to the low rate of sepsis in the treated groups, as the blood cultures drawn from central lines may have failed to grow due to the low levels of vancomycin in the infusate. although there is a theoretical concern regarding the development of resistant organisms with the administration of prophylactic antibiotic, there is insufficient evidence to ascertain the risks of development of vancomycin resistant organisms. few clinically important benefits have been demonstrated for very low birth weight infants treated with prophylactic vancomycin. it therefore appears that routine prophylaxis with vancomycin should not be undertaken at present.
there is some evidence suggesting improvement of metabolic control in poorly controlled adolescents with type 1 diabetes, on addition of metformin to insulin therapy. stronger evidence is required from larger studies, carried out over longer time periods to document the long-term effects on metabolic control, health-related quality of life as well as morbidity and mortality in those patients.
the few studies included in the review did not allow conclusions about the effect of paraprofessionals compared to professionals, but three studies (women only) indicated a significant effect for paraprofessionals (all volunteers) compared to no treatment. the evidence to date may justify the development and evaluation of programs incorporating paraprofessionals in treatment programs for anxiety and depressive disorders.
there is little evidence to suggest that aed treatment administered prophylactically is effective or not effective in preventing post-craniotomy seizures. the current evidence base is limited due to the differing methodologies employed in the trials and inconsistencies in reporting of outcomes. further evidence from good-quality, contemporary trials is required in order to assess the effectiveness of prophylactic aed treatment compared to control groups or other aeds in preventing post-craniotomy seizures properly.
tardive dyskinesia remains a major public health problem. the clinical effects of older cholinergic drugs are unclear, as too few, too small studies leave many questions unanswered. cholinergic drugs should remain of interest to researchers and currently have little place in routine clinical work. however, with the advent of new cholinergic agents now used for treating alzheimer's disease, scope exists for more informative trials. if these new cholinergic agents are to be investigated for treating people with tardive dyskinesia, their effects should be demonstrated in well-designed, conducted and reported randomised trials.
clindamycin preparations, oral metronidazole, and oral and intravaginal tablets of lactobacillus were effective for bacterial vaginosis. hydrogen peroxide douche and triple sulphonamide cream were ineffective. metronidazole caused metallic taste, nausea and vomiting. we need better-designed trials with larger sample sizes to test the effectiveness of promising drugs.
since the evidence shows no benefits or harms, there is no justification for the restriction of fluids and food in labour for women at low risk of complications. no studies looked specifically at women at increased risk of complications, hence there is no evidence to support restrictions in this group of women. conflicting evidence on carbohydrate solutions means further studies are needed and it is critical in any future studies to assess women's views.
although the trials of pad showed a reduction in the need for allogeneic blood, the methodological quality of the trials was poor and the overall transfusion rates (allogeneic and/or autologous) in these trials were high, and were increased by recruitment into the pad arms of the trials. this raises questions about the true benefit of pad. in the absence of large, high quality trials using clinical endpoints, it is not possible to say whether the benefits of pad outweigh the harms.
a clinically relevant effect of systematic desensitisation when compared with any of the control interventions cannot be ruled out. none of the included trials compared other behaviour therapies (e.g. cognitive behaviour therapy, sex therapy) to pharmacological interventions. the findings are limited by the evidence available and as such conclusions about the efficacy of interventions for the treatment of vaginismus should be drawn cautiously.
current efforts to improve or to facilitate adherence of people with type 2 diabetes to treatment recommendations do not show significant effects nor harms. the question whether any intervention enhances adherence to treatment recommendations in type 2 diabetes effectively, thus still remains unanswered.
chinese herbs combined with western medicines made no difference in decreasing mortality versus western medicines alone. it is possible that chinese herbs combined with western medicines may improve symptoms, quality of life and absorption of pulmonary infiltration, and decrease the corticosteroid dosage for sars patients. the evidence is weak because of the poor quality of the included trials. long-term follow-up of these included trials is needed.
amphetamines improved short-term adhd symptom severity. mas also increased retention in treatment. amphetamines were associated with higher attrition due to adverse events. the short study length and the restrictive inclusion criteria limit the external validity of these findings. furthermore, the possibility that the results of the included studies were biased was high, which could have led to an overestimation of amphetamine efficacy.
there are no proven clinically significant short or long-term benefits of pet in polycythemic newborn infants who are clinically well or who have minor symptoms related to hyperviscosity. pet may lead to an increase in the risk of nec. the data regarding developmental follow-up are extremely imprecise due to the large number of surviving infants who were not assessed and, therefore, the true risks and benefits of pet are unclear.
a single, low-quality randomised controlled trial suggests that trt is much more effective as a treatment for patients with tinnitus than tinnitus masking.
there is not enough evidence to support the use of naftidrofuryl in the treatment of acute ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke.
the available trial data suggest that advancing enteral feed volumes at slow rather than faster rates does not reduce the risk of necrotising enterocolitis in very preterm or vlbw infants. advancing the volume of enteral feeds at slow rates results in several days delay in regaining birth weight and establishing full enteral feeds but the long term clinical importance of these effects is unclear. the applicability of these findings to extremely preterm, extremely low birth weight or growth restricted infants is limited. further randomised controlled trials in these populations may be warranted to resolve this uncertainty.
the evidence did not provide conclusive results that ebb plus ebrt improved symptom relief over ebrt alone. we were not able to provide conclusive evidence to recommend ebb with ebrt, ebb in preference to ebrt, chemotherapy or nd-yag laser. from heterogeneous information obtained from several small rcts, we conclude that ebrt alone is more effective for palliation than ebb alone. for patients previously treated by ebrt who are symptomatic from recurrent endobronchial central obstruction, ebb may be considered in selected cases.
school meals may have some small benefits for disadvantaged children. we recommend further well-designed studies on the effectiveness of school meals be undertaken, that results should be reported according to socio-economic status, and that researchers gather robust data on both processes and carefully chosen outcomes.
there was evidence that group psychotherapy may improve erectile function. treatment response varied between patient subgroups, but focused sex-group therapy showed greater efficacy than control group (no treatment). in a meta-analysis that compared group therapy plus sildenafil citrate versus sildenafil, men randomised to receive group therapy plus sildenafil showed significant improvement of successful intercourse, and were less likely than those receiving only sildenafil to drop out. group psychotherapy also significantly improved ed compared to sildenafil citrate alone. regarding the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for the treatment of ed compared to local injection, vacuum devices and other psychosocial techniques, no differences were found.
the evidence from randomized controlled trials does not allow firm conclusions to be drawn about the effectiveness of botulinum toxin for all types of spasmodic dysphonia, or for patients with different behavioral or clinical characteristics.
in this updated review, we found five studies (four new studies) that met the inclusion criteria. the review suggests that practice-based ipc interventions can improve healthcare processes and outcomes, but due to the limitations in terms of the small number of studies, sample sizes, problems with conceptualising and measuring collaboration, and heterogeneity of interventions and settings, it is difficult to draw generalisable inferences about the key elements of ipc and its effectiveness. more rigorous, cluster randomised studies with an explicit focus on ipc and its measurement, are needed to provide better evidence of the impact of practice-based ipc interventions on professional practice and healthcare outcomes. these studies should include qualitative methods to provide insight into how the interventions affect collaboration and how improved collaboration contributes to changes in outcomes.
antifibrinolytic therapy causes a greater reduction in objective measurements of heavy menstrual bleeding when compared to placebo or other medical therapies (nsaids, oral luteal phase progestagens and ethamsylate). this treatment is not associated with an increase in side effects compared to placebo, nsaids, oral luteal phase progestagens or ethamsylate. flooding and leakage and sex life is significantly improved after tranexamic acid therapy when compared with oral luteal progestogens but no other measures of quality of life were assessed. no study has used resource cost as an outcome. there are no data available within randomised controlled trials which record the frequency of thromboembolic events.
education programmes appear to have beneficial effects on improving patients' knowledge of diabetes and some self-management behavioural changes for patients with diabetes on dialysis or with microalbuminuria. educational programmes appear to have beneficial effects on improving patients' self-efficacy and result in some beliefs changes for patients with diabetes and microalbuminuria. however, only two studies with small sample sizes and inadequate quality were included in this review. there is, therefore, inadequate evidence to support the beneficial effects of education programmes for people with dkd.
there is evidence that the epley manoeuvre is a safe, effective treatment for posterior canal bppv, based on the results of five mostly small randomised controlled trials with relatively short follow up. there is no good evidence that the epley manoeuvre provides a long-term resolution of symptoms. there is no good evidence comparing the epley manoeuvre with other physical, medical or surgical therapy for posterior canal bppv.
lmwh is possibly superior to ufh in the initial treatment of vte in patients with cancer. additional trials focusing on patient important outcomes will further inform the questions addressed in this review.
there is evidence for benefit of alc on clinical global impression as a categorical measure and on mmse at 24 weeks, but there is no evidence using objective assessments in any other area of outcome. given the large number of comparisons made, the statistically significant results may be due to chance. at present there is no evidence to recommend its routine use in clinical practice. many of the trials used rather vague descriptions of dementia and trials using more strictly defined groups may be informative. individual patient data may add to the findings, as would trials including other outcomes (e.g. mood and caregiver quality of life). however, the evidence does not suggest that alc is likely to prove an important therapeutic agent. more work on the pharmacokinetics of alc in humans is also required.
invasive methods of fluid optimization during surgery may shorten hospital stay, but their effects on other important, patient-centred, longer-term outcomes are uncertain. adverse effects on fatality cannot be excluded. other fluid optimization techniques have not been evaluated. the lack of randomized studies of adequate quality addressing this important question is disappointing. more research is needed.
late radiation complications are relatively rare, involving potential carers and poor diagnostic criteria. although certain interventions look promising (e.g. rectal sucralfate, adding metronidazole to the anti-inflammatory regime and heater probes), single small studies, even if well conducted provide insufficient evidence. the episodic and variable nature of late radiation proctitis requires large multi-centre placebo-rcts to establish whether particular treatments are effective. regional or centralised registers of radiation toxicity should be established so interventions can be administered in the setting of multi-centre rcts with specific entry criteria, formal baseline and therapeutic assessments providing standardised outcome data including quality of life (qol) evaluations.
the four-dose regimen of artemether-lumefantrine seems to be less effective than regimens against which it has been tested. the six-dose regimen is superior to four-dose regimen. 2008: this review will not be updated because the four-dose regimen is no longer recommended; see 'what's new' for details.
in view of the equivocal findings of this review, conclusions about the efficacy and acceptability of valproate compared to placebo and lithium cannot be made with any degree of confidence. with current evidence, patients and clinicians would probably wish to use lithium before valproate for maintenance treatment. at present, the observed shift of prescribing practice to valproate is not based on reliable evidence of efficacy
metrifonate given once per day appears to be related to clinical response in cognition, global improvement, and activities of daily living in patients with mild to moderate alzheimer's disease.tolerability is good with adverse events as expected from a cholinesterase inhibitor, but with a low incidence of neuromuscular dysfunction and respiratory failure, too low to be detected in this review. it has been withdrawn from further development.
the existing evidence supports the use of restrictive transfusion triggers in most patients, including those with pre-existing cardiovascular disease. as there are no trials, the effects of restrictive transfusion triggers in high-risk groups, such as acute coronary syndrome, need to be tested in further large clinical trials. in countries with inadequate screening of donor blood, the data may constitute a stronger basis for avoiding transfusion with allogeneic red cells.
clinical heterogeneity, such as different lengths of follow up and higher plateau pressure in control arms in two trials, makes the interpretation of the combined results difficult. mortality was significantly reduced at day 28 and at the end of the hospital stay. the effects on long-term mortality are unknown, although the possibility of a clinically relevant benefit cannot be excluded. ventilation with lower tidal volumes is becoming a routine strategy of treatment of acute respiratory distress syndrome and acute lung injury, stopping investigators from carrying out additional trials.
danazol appears to be an effective treatment for heavy menstrual bleeding compared to other medical treatments. the use of danazol may be limited by its side effect profile, its acceptability to women and the need for continuing treatment. the small number of trials, and the small sample sizes of the included trials limit the recommendations for clinical care. further studies are unlikely in the future and this review will not be updated unless further studies are identified.
isoniazid prophylaxis in hiv-infected children has the potential to play a major public health role by reducing tb incidence and death. however there is as yet not enough data to guide the duration of prophylaxis, given empirically, nor to support its use in children on haart and in those living in low tb prevalence areas, other than in situations of known tb contact. further studies are needed to assess whether tb preventive therapy is of benefit in all hiv-infected children irrespective of use of antiretroviral treatment, the optimal duration of preventive therapy or long term benefits and adverse events.
there remains limited evidence from which to draw firm conclusions about the benefits or harms of topical or oral nsaids in treating lateral elbow pain. although data from five placebo-controlled trials suggest that topical nsaids may be beneficial in improving pain (for up to 4 weeks), non-normal distribution of data and other methodological issues precluded firm conclusions. some people may expect a mild transient skin rash. evidence about the benefits of oral nsaids has been conflicting, although oral nsaid use may result in gastrointestinal adverse effects in some people. no direct comparisons between oral and topical nsaids were available. some trials demonstrated greater benefit from glucocorticoid injection than from nsaids in the short term, but this was not apparent in all studies and was not apparent by 6 months in the only study that included longer-term outcomes.
tacrolimus is superior to cyclosporin in improving graft survival and preventing acute rejection after kidney transplantation, but increases post-transplant diabetes, neurological and gastrointestinal side effects. treating 100 recipients with tacrolimus instead of cyclosporin would avoid 12 suffering acute rejection, two losing their graft but cause an extra five to become insulin-requiring diabetics.
discrepancies between protocols or trial registry entries and trial reports were common, although reasons for these were not discussed in the reports. full transparency will be possible only when protocols are made publicly available or the quality and extent of information included in trial registries is improved, and trialists explain substantial changes in their reports.
limitations included methodological quality, variations in intervention implementation, and outcomes. the intervention appears to benefit breastfeeding outcomes, and cardio-respiratory stability and decrease infant crying, and has no apparent short- or long-term negative effects. further investigation is recommended. to facilitate meta-analysis, future research should be done using outcome measures consistent with those in the studies included here. published reports should clearly indicate if the intervention was ssc with time of initiation and duration and include means, standard deviations and exact probability values.
these results are encouraging but are limited by the sparse data and unclear methodological robustness, therefore further evidence is required before amnioinfusion for pprom can be recommended for routine clinical practice.
there was no significant difference in the risk of death for low (< 120 g/l) versus higher hb targets (>133 g/l). lower hb targets were significantly associated with an increased risk for seizures but a reduced risk of hypertension. in general study quality was poor. there is a need for more adequately powered, well-designed and reported trials. trials should be pragmatic, focusing on hard end-points (mortality, eskd, major side effects) or outcomes which were previously not studied adequately (e.g. seizures, quality of life).
results from this review indicate that there is inconsistent evidence from two studies on patients at different risk of pvr on the effect of lmwh and 5-fu used during vitrectomy to prevent pvr. future research should be conducted on high risk patients only, until a benefit is confirmed at least in this patient subgroup.
we found two relevant trials in this systematic review, only one of them could provide some weak evidence that acyclovir is an effective treatment in reducing the number of oral lesions, preventing the development of new extraoral lesions, decreasing the number of individuals with difficulties experienced in eating and drinking and reducing hospital admission for children under 6 years of age with primary herpetic gingivostomatitis.
at this time, it is impossible to draw reliable conclusions from available data to support the use of acupuncture for the treatment of glaucoma. because of ethical considerations, rcts comparing acupuncture alone with standard glaucoma treatment or placebo are unlikely to be justified in countries where the standard of care has already been established. because most glaucoma patients currently cared for by ophthalmologists do not use nontraditional therapy, clinical practice decisions will have to be based on physician judgments and patient preferences, given this lack of data in the literature. inclusion of the seven chinese trials in future updates of this review may change our conclusions.
the evidence base is not strong enough to support firm conclusions. the available evidence suggests that aq plus sp can achieve less treatment failure than sp, but this might depend on existing levels of parasite resistance to the individual drugs. addendum, 2008: the world health organization (in 2006) recommended that monotherapy should not be used for treating malaria. therefore the authors do not intend to update this review.
drain use after elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy increases wound infection rates and delays hospital discharge. we could not find evidence to support the use of drain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
given the paucity of robust studies assessing the clinical effects of treatments, available evidence is insufficient to judge the effectiveness and safety of chemotherapy for the treatment of bm from sclc. published studies are insufficient to address the objectives of this review. according to the available evidence included in this review, chemotherapy does not improve specific brain pfs and os in patients with sclc. the combined treatment of teniposide and brain radiation therapy contributed to outcome in terms of increased complete remission and shorter time to progression (though not os).
in summary, preoperative chemotherapy plus surgery may offer a survival advantage compared to surgery alone for resectable thoracic esophageal cancer, but the evidence is inconclusive. there is some evidence of toxicity and preoperative mortality associated with chemotherapy.
at present, evidence from randomised-controlled trials is insufficient to recommend a specific role for vitamin c in the treatment of asthma. further methodologically strong and large-scale randomised controlled trials are needed in order to address the question of the effectiveness of vitamin c in asthma.
there is currently insufficient evidence to support the routine administration of nitric oxide donors in the treatment of threatened preterm labour. [note: the 26 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine offer no advantage over placebo for induction of remission or clinical improvement in active crohn's disease. antimetaboilte therapy may allow patients to reduce steroid consumption. adverse events were more common in patients receiving antimetabolites although differences with placebo were not statistically significant. azathioprine therapy is inferior to infliximab for induction of steroid-free remission. however, the combination of azathioprine and infliximab was superior to infliximab alone for induction of steroid-free remission.
this review suggests a modest to moderate benefit for psychological interventions, particularly those using a cognitive-behavioural framework, which was largely restricted to the first three months after the intervention. hypnotherapy is also a possible alternative. the evidence for brief interventions was less clear. further rcts of psychological interventions for nscp with follow-up periods of at least 12 months are needed.
despite significantly increased overall response and complete remission rates and longer progression-free survival with first-line treatment of b-cll patients with single-agent purine antagonists, we were not able to detect a statistically significant improvement of overall survival compared to alkylator-based regimens. furthermore, the use of purine antagonists also augments the risk for grade iii/iv infections and haemolytic anaemia.
school-based secondary prevention programmes to reduce aggressive behaviour appear to produce improvements in behaviour greater than would have been expected by chance. benefits can be achieved in both primary and secondary school age groups and in both mixed sex groups and boys-only groups. further research is required to establish whether such programmes reduce the incidence of violent injuries or if the benefits identified can be maintained beyond 12 months.
overall, the data from currently published clinical trials of lhrh agonists in the adjuvant setting for premenopausal women with endocrine-sensitive breast cancer are supportive of clinical benefit. nonetheless, definitive comparisons against current clinical standards of care that include third generation chemotherapy regimens and tamoxifen are required before their place in the adjuvant setting can be properly defined. the authors conclude that the current data strongly support the continuation of current trials that definitively compare a variety of combinations of lhrh agonists and anti-oestrogenic strategies to the current standard of five years of tamoxifen.
the results suggest that no psychological intervention can be recommended for routine use following traumatic events and that multiple session interventions, like single session interventions, may have an adverse effect on some individuals. the clear practice implication of this is that, at present, multiple session interventions aimed at all individuals exposed to traumatic events should not be used. further, better designed studies that explore new approaches to early intervention are now required.
there is insufficient evidence to assess whether pneumococcal vaccination during pregnancy could reduce infant infections.
at present, there is insufficient evidence to decide on the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of chelation therapy in improving clinical outcomes of people with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. this decision must be preceded by conducting randomized controlled trials that would include endpoints that show the effects of chelation therapy on longevity and quality of life among people with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
zidovudine, nevirapine and delivery by elective caesarean section appear to be very effective in decreasing the risk of mother-to-child transmission of hiv infection.
the results of this review provide evidence that transdermal nicotine is superior to placebo for the induction of remission in patient's with ulcerative colitis. the review did not identify any significant advantage for transdermal nicotine therapy compared to standard medical therapy. adverse events associated with transdermal nicotine are significant and limit its use in some patients.
tor and tam are equally effective and the safety profile of the former is at least not worse than the latter in the first-line treatment of patients with advanced breast cancer. thus, tor may serve as a reasonable alternative to tam when anti-oestrogens are applicable but tam is not the preferred choice for some reason.
we conclude that further randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials should be carried out to compare cyclosporine, azathioprine and benzathine-penicillin versus placebo in order to make the results generalizable and comparable.
there is evidence from a single large randomized trial which suggests that intramuscular methotrexate (25 mg/week) provides a benefit for induction of remission and complete withdrawal from steroids in patients with refractory crohn's disease. lower dose oral methotrexate does not appear to provide any significant benefit relative to placebo or active comparator. however, these trials were small and further studies of oral methotrexate may be justified. comparative studies of methotrexate to drugs such as azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine would require the randomization of large numbers of patients. the addition of methotrexate to infliximab therapy does not appear to provide any additional benefit over infiximab monotherapy. however these studies were relatively small and further research is needed to determine the role of methotrexate when used in conjunction with infliximab or other biological therapies.
owing to the small number of included trials and patients, the findings in this review remain uncertain. in summary, the presently available evidence (one small trial) showed a benefit in terms of pfs, orr and crr but no statistically significant difference regarding os for patients with pcnsl treated with hd-mtx plus cytarabine compared to hd-mtx alone. however, the risk of severe infections and toxicity was significantly higher in patients treated with combined chemotherapy. more rcts with additional chemotherapy to hd-mtx therapy with higher numbers of patients and longer follow-up periods are needed to confirm the results of this review and determine whether the pfs benefit will translate into an os advantage. at least the one included study shows that rcts of moderate quality and with valuable outcomes for this malignant disease are feasible.
compared with eswl, ureteroscopic removal of ureteral stones achieves a greater stone-free state, but with a higher complication rate and longer hospital stay.
in people who are nasal carriers of s. aureus, the use of mupirocin ointment results in a statistically significant reduction in s. aureus infections.
the available evidence suggests that bta injections provide more objective and subjective benefit than trihexyphenidyl to patients with cervical dystonia. we could not draw any conclusions about other anticholinergic drugs. future trials should explore the role of anticholinergic drugs in patients that do not get benefit with bta.
while in general, conservative therapy appears to be as effective as aggressive therapy in preparation for surgery in people with sickle cell disease, further research is needed to examine the optimal regimen for different surgical types, and to address whether preoperative transfusion is needed in all surgical situations.
single fraction radiotherapy was as effective as multifraction radiotherapy in relieving metastatic bone pain. however, the retreatment rate and pathological fracture rates were higher after single fraction radiotherapy. studies with quality of life and health economic end points are warranted to find out the optimal treatment option.
currently available information allows no unbiased statement about safety or efficacy of aminopyridines for treating ms symptoms. furthermore, we could not obtain any data on three unpublished rcts (more than 300 participants). we conclude that publication bias remains a pervasive problem in this area, and that until the results of these unpublished studies are available to the scientific community, no confident estimate of effectiveness of aminopyridines in the management of ms symptoms is possible.
pe with ffp is still the most effective treatment available for ttp. for patients with hus, supportive therapy including dialysis is still the most effective treatment. all studies in hus have been conducted in the diarrhoeal form of the disease. there were no rcts evaluating the effectiveness of any interventions on patients with atypical hus who have a more chronic and relapsing course.
no randomised or controlled trial was identified comparing albumin to crystalloids (other than normal saline) or non-protein colloids, or a combination of both, in the treatment of symptomatic hypotension during dialysis. one double blind crossover rct in 45 assessable patients showed that 5% albumin is not superior to normal saline for the treatment of symptomatic hypotension in maintenance haemodialysis patients with a previous history of idh. given the cost and relative rarity of albumin use compared to saline, saline should be first line of therapy for treatment of idh in stable dialysis patients.
the long-term benefits of continuing antidepressant medication in the prevention of recurrence of depression in older people are not clear and no firm treatment recommendations can be made on the basis of this review. continuing antidepressant medication for 12 months appears to be helpful but this is based on only three small studies with relatively few participants using differing classes of antidepressants in clinically heterogeneous populations. comparisons at other time points did not reach statistical significance. data on psychological therapies and combined treatments are too limited to draw any conclusions.
overall, the evidence base for the effectiveness of interventions to reduce soft-tissue injury after intensive running is very weak, with few trials at low risk of bias. more well-designed and reported rcts are needed that test interventions in recreational and competitive runners.
there is evidence that cognitive interventions do lead to performance gains but none of the effects observed could be attributable specifically to cognitive training, as the improvements observed did not exceed the improvement in active control conditions. this does not mean that longer, more intense or different interventions might not be effective, but that those which have been reported thus far have only limited effect. we therefore suggest more standardized study protocols in order to maximize comparability of studies and to maximize the possibility of data pooling - also in other cognitive domains than memory.
our review shows a significant benefit of adenoidectomy as far as the resolution of middle ear effusion in children with ome is concerned. however, the benefit to hearing is small and the effects on changes in the tympanic membrane are unknown. the risks of operating should be weighed against these potential benefits. the absence of a significant benefit of adenoidectomy on aom suggests that routine surgery for this indication is not warranted.
there is good evidence that excisional surgery for endometriomata provides a more favourable outcome than drainage and ablation with regard to the recurrence of the endometrioma, recurrence of pain symptoms, and subsequent spontaneous pregnancy in women who were previously subfertile. consequently this approach should be the favoured surgical approach. however in women who may subsequently undergo fertility treatment, insufficient evidence exists to determine the favoured surgical approach.
without demonstrable benefit, preservation of anal continence should not be used as a criterion for choosing elective primary cd. the strength of this conclusion would be greatly strengthened if there were studies that randomised women with average risk pregnancies to cd versus vd.
to date there is uncertainty regarding the long-term benefits and risks of treatment with tiotropium in addition to inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta2-agonist combination therapy on mortality, hospitalisation, exacerbations of copd and pneumonia. the addition of combination treatment to tiotropium has shown improvements in average health-related quality of life and lung function.
there is an absence of evidence that teg or rotem improves morbidity or mortality in patients with severe bleeding. application of a teg or rotem guided transfusion strategy seems to reduce the amount of bleeding but whether this has implications for the clinical condition of patients is still uncertain. more research is needed.
on the basis of the findings of this review, we cannot recommend routine use of the partogram as part of standard labour management and care. given the fact that the partogram is currently in widespread use and generally accepted, it appears reasonable, until stronger evidence is available, that partogram use should be locally determined. further trial evidence is required to establish the efficacy of partogram use.
current evidence suggests that oral corticosteroids as an adjunctive therapy to oral antibiotics are effective for short-term relief of symptoms in acute sinusitis. however, data are limited and there is a significant risk of bias. high quality trials assessing the efficacy of systemic corticosteroids both as an adjuvant and a monotherapy in primary care patients with acute sinusitis should be initiated.
there is evidence that information improves patient and carer knowledge of stroke, aspects of patient satisfaction, and reduces patient depression scores. however, the reduction in depression scores was small and may not be clinically significant. although the best way to provide information is still unclear there is some evidence that strategies that actively involve patients and carers and include planned follow-up for clarification and reinforcement have a greater effect on patient mood.
the findings of this single eligible trial support the results of large, open, case-control studies showing a benefit rate between 76 and 100%. this effect size probably makes it very difficult to perform new large placebo controlled trials for hemifacial spasm. despite the paucity of good quality controlled data, all the studies available suggest that bta is effective and safe for treating hemifacial spasm. future trials should explore technical factors such as the optimum treatment intervals, different injection techniques, doses, bt types and formulations. other issues include service delivery, quality of life, long-term efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity. bta should be compared with surgical microvascular decompression.
multifocal iols are effective at improving near vision relative to monofocal iols. whether that improvement outweighs the adverse effects of multifocal iols will vary between patients. motivation to achieve spectacle independence is likely to be the deciding factor.
based upon the limited randomised controlled evidence available, the timing of surgery was not a critical factor in determining outcome following a subarachnoid haemorrhage. since the publication of the only randomised controlled study in 1989, techniques for the treatment of subarachnoid haemorrhage have progressed, questioning the validity of the conclusions in the modern era. currently, most neurovascular surgeons elect to operate within 3 or 4 days of the bleed in good grade patients to minimise the chances of a devastating rebleed. however, the treatment of patients in poorer grades warrants further scrutiny in a randomised controlled trial.
the current evidence is insufficient to recommend choosing antibiotics based on biofilm antimicrobial susceptibility testing rather than conventional antimicrobial susceptibility testing in the treatment of pseudomonas aeruginosa pulmonary infections in people with cystic fibrosis. future randomized clinical trials on this topic may shed further light on this question.
no rcts were located that assessed the effects of preconception advice on the chance of a live birth or other fertility outcomes in people who perceived that they may be infertile and were investigating the possibility of medical treatment to address subfertility. given the lack of rcts evaluating the effectiveness of preconception lifestyle advice for people in the afore-mentioned population, this review cannot provide guidance for clinical practice in this area. however, it does highlight the need for further research into this important subject.
we found no high-quality evidence to support the use of any of the topical preparations in the prevention of stretch marks during pregnancy. there is a clear need for robust, methodologically rigorous randomised trials involving larger sample sizes to evaluate the effects of topical preparations on the development of stretch marks in pregnancy. in addition, it is important that preparations commonly used by women to prevent and treat stretch marks are evaluated within the context of robust, methodologically rigorous and adequately powered randomised trials.
group-based training for self-management strategies in people with type 2 diabetes is effective by improving fasting blood glucose levels, glycated haemoglobin and diabetes knowledge and reducing systolic blood pressure levels, body weight and the requirement for diabetes medication.
while discontinuation rates can be viewed as a measure of method acceptability, the findings should be interpreted with caution since discontinuation depends on many factors. future research should be directed toward improving the acceptability of combination injectable contraceptives, such as providing injections in settings more convenient than clinics, methods for women to administer their own injections, and counseling about possible bleeding pattern changes.
the updated search could not reveal any additional evidence. very few trials have compared different types of catheter for long-term bladder drainage. all trials were small and showed methodological weaknesses. therefore, the evidence was not sufficient as a reliable basis for practical conclusions. further, better quality trials are needed to address the current lack of evidence in this clinically important area.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the use of ultrasound in treating perineal pain or dyspareunia, or both, following childbirth.
caution is required when interpreting the possible positive effects of chest physiotherapy of a reduction in the use of reintubation and the trend for decreased post-extubation atelectasis as the numbers of babies studied are small, the results are not consistent across trials, data on safety are insufficient, and applicability to current practice may be limited.
there are insufficient data to know what the effects of osmotic diuretics are in children with cerebral malaria. larger, multicentre trials are needed.
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether sfh measurement is effective in detecting iugr. we cannot therefore recommended any change of current practice. further trials are needed.
there is currently no evidence from randomised trials that cromolyn sodium has a role in the prevention of cld. cromolyn sodium cannot be recommended for the prevention of cld in preterm infants.
overall, weight loss strategies using dietary, physical activity, or behavioral interventions produced significant improvements in weight among persons with prediabetes and a significant decrease in diabetes incidence. further work is needed on the long-term effects of these interventions on morbidity and mortality and on how to implement these interventions in diverse community settings.
this review provides some evidence from small, single assessment studies that ambulatory oxygen improves exercise performance in people with moderate to severe copd. the results of the review may be affected by publication bias, and the small sample sizes in the studies. although positive, the findings of the review require replication in larger trials with more distinct subgroups of participants. maximal or endurance tests can be used in ambulatory oxygen assessment. consideration should be given to the measurement of sao2 and breathlessness at isotime as these provide important additional information. we recommend that these outcomes are included in the assessment for ambulatory oxygen. future research needs to establish the level of benefit of ambulatory oxygen in specific subgroups of people with copd.
the data provide limited support for the use of fetal pulse oximetry when used in the presence of a nonreassuring ctg, to reduce caesarean section for nonreassuring fetal status. the addition of fetal pulse oximetry does not reduce overall caesarean section rates. a better method to evaluate fetal well-being in labour is required.
this review found that orbital radiotherapy is more effective than sham radiotherapy for the treatment of mild-to-moderate thyroid eye disease. in a single trial no difference between radiotherapy and steroid monotherapy was found. a meta-analysis of our secondary outcome of disease severity was not possible but results from individual trials suggest a better outcome with combination treatment with steroids versus steroids alone. no significant changes in quality-of-life scores following treatment with radiotherapy versus alternative treatments were found. short-term adverse events related to radiotherapy that were reported were local and mild but long-term data were lacking and development of retinal changes following radiotherapy was not reported on.
reducing protein intake in patients with chronic kidney disease reduces the occurrence of renal death by 32% as compared with higher or unrestricted protein intake. the optimal level of protein intake cannot be confirmed from these studies.
it was not possible to draw any firm conclusions on the effect of enteral and parenteral nutrition on the prevention and treatment of pressure ulcers. further trials of high methodological quality are necessary.
nsaids reduce hmb when compared with placebo but are less effective than tranexamic acid, danazol or lng ius. however, adverse events are more severe with danazol therapy. in the limited number of small studies suitable for evaluation, no significant difference in efficacy was demonstrated between nsaids and other medical treatments such as oral luteal progestogen, ethamsylate, occ or another type of intrauterine system, progestasert.
this review provides some evidence to show that there is no statistically significant difference in postoperative discomfort, level of patient satisfaction, plate exposure or infection for plate and screw fixation using either titanium or resorbable materials in orthognathic surgery.
there is no evidence suggesting that oral antibiotic therapy is less effective for treatment of severe uti than parenteral or initial parenteral therapy. the results of this review suggest that the mode of application does not determine therapeutic success.
there is low quality evidence that implementation of stricter legislation can reduce noise levels in workplaces. even though case studies show that substantial reductions in noise levels in the workplace can be achieved, there are no controlled studies of the effectiveness of such measures. the effectiveness of hearing protection devices depends on training and their proper use. there is very low quality evidence that the better use of hearing protection devices as part of hlpps reduces the risk of hearing loss, whereas for other programme components of hlpps we did not find such an effect. better implementation and reinforcement of hlpps is needed. better evaluations of technical interventions and long-term effects are needed.
we found only low quality evidence comparing ultra-radical and standard surgery in women with advanced ovarian cancer and carcinomatosis. the evidence suggested that ultra-radical surgery may result in better survival. it was unclear whether there were any differences in progression-free survival, qol and morbidity between the two groups. the cost-effectiveness of this intervention has not been investigated. we are, therefore, unable to reach definite conclusions about the relative benefits and adverse effects of the two types of surgery. in order to determine the role of ultra-radical surgery in the management of advanced stage ovarian cancer, a sufficiently powered randomised controlled trial comparing ultra-radical and standard surgery or well-designed non-randomised studies would be required.
in patients with breast cancer receiving chemotherapy, csfs have shown evidence of beneﬁt in the prevention of fn. there is evidence, though less reliable, of a decrease of all-cause mortality during chemotherapy and a reduced need for hospital care. no reliable evidence was found for a reduction of infection-related mortality, a higher dose intensity of chemotherapy with csfs or diminished rates of severe neutropenia and infections. the majority of adverse events reported from csf use were bone pain and injection-site reactions but no conclusions could be drawn regarding late-term side effects.
a few small studies demonstrate that tepid sponging helps to reduce fever in children.
it appears that administration sets that do not contain lipids, blood or blood products may be left in place for intervals of up to 96 hours without increasing the incidence of infection. there was no evidence to suggest that administration sets which contain lipids should not be changed every 24 hours as currently recommended.
the three included trials provided some weak and unreliable evidence for the effectiveness of beconase® and flunisolide used topically intranasally for the treatment of intermittent and persistent allergic rhinitis in children. the reduction of severity in symptoms as assessed by the trialists could not be confirmed with the data provided and decisions on the use of these medications should, until such time as more robust evidence is available, be guided by the physician's clinical experience and patients' individual circumstances and preferences.
there is currently no evidence to support the use of antiviral drugs in the treatment of isshl. the four trials included in this review were, however, small and with a low risk of bias. further randomised controlled trials with larger patient populations, using standardised inclusion criteria, antiviral regimes and outcome measures, are needed in order for adequate meta-analysis to be performed to reach definitive conclusions. a uniform definition of isshl should also be established, together with what constitutes adequate recovery.
cot-nursing using a heated water-filled mattress has similar effects to incubator care with regard to temperature control and weight gain. important clinical outcomes need to be investigated further using randomised controlled trials. this is especially the case in the situation of developing countries, where differences in these outcomes are likely to be encountered. as limited data is available on cot-nursing using a space-heated room, this method is not recommended as practice.
massage may have a role in reducing pain, and improving women's emotional experience of labour. however, there is a need for further research.
aripiprazole may be effective for the treatment of schizophrenia. aripiprazole has a lower risk of raised prolactin and prolongation of the qtc interval. clearly reported pragmatic short-, medium- and long-term randomised controlled trials should be undertaken to determine its position in everyday clinical practice.
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of manual therapies for patients with asthma. there is a need to conduct adequately-sized rcts that examine the effects of manual therapies on clinically relevant outcomes. future trials should maintain observer blinding for outcome assessments, and report on the costs of care and adverse events. currently, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of manual therapy for patients with asthma.
ziprasidone may be a slightly less efficacious antipsychotic drug than amisulpride, olanzapine and risperidone. its main advantage is the low propensity to induce weight gain and associated adverse effects. however, the high overall rate of participants leaving the studies early limits the validity of any findings.
high quality evidence showed no significant benefit from anti-herpes simplex antivirals compared with placebo in producing complete recovery from bell's palsy. moderate quality evidence showed that antivirals were significantly less likely than corticosteroids to produce complete recovery.
the use of either c3f8 or silicone oil appears reasonable for most patients with rd associated with pvr. because there do not appear to be any major differences in outcomes between the two agents, the choice of a tamponade agent should be individualized for each patient.
there is insufficient evidence to support the hypothesis that discontinuing epidural analgesia late in labour reduces the rate of instrumental delivery. there is evidence that it increases the rate of inadequate pain relief in the second stage of labour. the practice of discontinuing epidurals is widespread and the size of the reduction in instrumental delivery rate could be clinically important; therefore, we recommend a larger study than those included in this review be undertaken to determine whether this effect is real or has occurred by chance, and to provide stronger evidence about the safety aspects.
the results from the four trials to date demonstrate no advantage to early repair (via open or endovascular surgery) for small aaa (4.0 to 5.5 cm) and suggest that 'best care' for these patients favours surveillance. furthermore, the more recent trials focused on the efficacy of endovascular aneurysm repair and still failed to show benefit. thus, both open and endovascular repair of small aaas are not supported by currently available evidence.
there was insufficient evidence to preferentially recommend the use of sclerotherapy or surgery. there needs to be more research that specifically examines both costs and outcomes for surgery and sclerotherapy.
there is no evidence of benefit associated with post surgical medical therapy and insufficient evidence to determine whether there is a benefit from pre-surgical medical therapy with regard to the outcomes evaluated.
antifungal primary prophylaxis with either itraconazole or fluconazole is effective in reducing the incidence of cryptococcal disease in adults with advanced hiv disease. however, neither of these interventions has a clear effect on overall mortality. further research is needed to better understand these interventions and the populations in which they may be most effective.
there is insufficient good quality evidence to make recommendations about the relative effect of home-based therapy programmes compared with placebo, no intervention or usual care.
the impact of factors varied across studies. researchers need to be aware that aspects of the design and conduct of trials can affect clinicians' willingness to invite patients to participate. further research is needed.
there is little evidence of benefit from using corticosteroids or intravenous immunoglobulins to reduce the risk of heart valve lesions in patients with acute rheumatic fever. the antiquity of most of the trials restricted adequate statistical analysis of the data and acceptable assessment of clinical outcomes by current standards. additionally there was substantial risk of bias, so results should be viewed with caution. new randomised controlled trials in patients with acute rheumatic fever to assess the effects of corticosteroids such as oral prednisone and intravenous methylprednisolone, and other new anti-inflammatory agents are warranted. advances in echocardiography will allow for more objective and precise assessments of cardiac outcomes.
we found moderate-quality evidence that cbt did not significantly reduce time until partial rtw and low-quality evidence that it did not significantly reduce time to full rtw compared with no treatment. moderate-quality evidence showed that pst significantly enhanced partial rtw at one-year follow-up compared to non-guideline based care but did not significantly enhance time to full rtw at one-year follow-up. an important limitation was the small number of studies included in the meta-analyses and the small number of participants, which lowered the power of the analyses.
honey may be better than 'no treatment' and diphenhydramine in the symptomatic relief of cough but not better than dextromethorphan. there is no strong evidence for or against the use of honey.
there is insufficient evidence to be sure about the efficacy of sodium cromoglycate over placebo. publication bias is likely to have overestimated the beneficial effects of sodium cromoglycate as maintenance therapy in childhood asthma.
there is moderate evidence that acupuncture relieves pain better than some sham treatments, measured at the end of the treatment. there is moderate evidence that those who received acupuncture reported less pain at short term follow-up than those on a waiting list. there is also moderate evidence that acupuncture is more effective than inactive treatments for relieving pain post-treatment and this is maintained at short-term follow-up.
although there are shortcomings in the data, there is enough overall consistency over different outcomes and time scales to confirm that pimozide is a drug with similar efficacy to other more commonly used antipsychotic drugs such as chlorpromazine for people with schizophrenia. there are no data to support or refute its use for those with delusional disorder.
historical and programme documentation has clearly established the impact of irs. however, the number of high-quality trials are too few to quantify the size of effect in different transmission settings. the evidence from randomized comparisons of irs versus no irs confirms that irs reduces malaria incidence in unstable malaria settings, but randomized trial data from stable malaria settings is very limited. some limited data suggest that itn give better protection than irs in unstable areas, but more trials are needed to compare the effects of itns with irs, as well as to quantify their combined effects. ideally future trials should try and evaluate the effect of irs in areas with no previous history of malaria control activities.
based on the heterogeneity of the populations, interventions and comparison groups, we conclude that there are insufficient data to draw firm conclusions on the clinical effect of lllt for low-back pain. there is a need for further methodologically rigorous rcts to evaluate the effects of lllt compared to other treatments, different lengths of treatment, wavelengths and dosages.
although the nonlatex condoms were associated with higher rates of clinical breakage than their latex comparison condoms, the new condoms still provide an acceptable alternative for those with allergies, sensitivities, or preferences that might prevent the consistent use of latex condoms. the contraceptive efficacy of the nonlatex condoms requires more research.
three rcts for only two types of interventions to prevent cvc-related infections in children with cancer have been identified. flushing cvc with urokinase (with or without heparin) compared to heparin alone possibly leads to decrease in cai rates. changing catheter dressings every 15 days versus every 4 days does not lead to more premature catheter removals due to infection although data were insufficient to assess if catheter-related infection rates were changed.
.despite higher cr rates, there is no benefit for high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation as a first line treatment in patients with aggressive nhl.
considering the lack of clinical benefit and the frequent adverse effects, there is currently no evidence to recommend antiviral treatment for recurrent liver graft infection with hcv. further randomised clinical trials with adequate trial methodology and adequate duration of follow-up are necessary.
fluoxetine, amlodipine, imipramine and desipramine have very limited benefits for amphetamine dependence and abuse. fluoxetine may decrease craving in short-term treatment. imipramine may increase duration of adherence to treatment in medium-term treatment. apart from these, no other benefits can be found. this limited evidence suggests that no treatment has been demonstrated to be effective for the treatment of amphetamine dependence and abuse. although there is a large number of people with amphetamine dependence and abuse worldwide, very few controlled trials in this issue have been conducted. as the previous treatment trials show no promising result, other treatments, both biological and psychosocial, should be further investigated. however, the results of neurotoxic studies of amphetamines are also crucial for the study designs appropriate for further treatment studies for amphetamine dependence and abuse.
anticonvulsants appear to be both effective in reducing migraine frequency and reasonably well tolerated. there is noticeable variation among individual agents, but there are insufficient data to know whether this is due to chance or variation in true efficacy. acetazolamide, clonazepam, lamotrigine and vigabatrin were not superior to placebo (one trial each). relatively few robust trials are available for agents other than sodium valproate/divalproex sodium and topiramate; gabapentin in particular needs further evaluation. trials designed with sufficient power to compare different drugs are also necessary.
the six-dose regimen of artemether-lumefantrine appears more effective than antimalarial regimens not containing artemisinin derivatives.
glucose infusion rate: there is insufficient evidence from trials comparing lower with higher glucose infusion rates to inform clinical practice. large randomized trials are needed, powered on clinical outcomes including death, major morbidities and adverse neurodevelopment. insulin infusion: the evidence reviewed does not support the routine use of insulin infusions to prevent hyperglycemia in vlbw neonates. further randomized trials of insulin infusion may be justified. they should enrol extremely low birth weight neonates at very high risk for hyperglycemia and neonatal death. they might use real time glucose monitors if these are validated for clinical use. refinement of algorithms to guide insulin infusion is needed to enable tight control of glucose concentrations within the target range.
currently there is no research evidence to suggest that foam wound dressings are more effective in healing foot ulcers in people with diabetes than other types of dressing however all trials in this field are very small. decision makers may wish to consider aspects such as dressing cost and the wound management properties offered by each dressing type e.g. exudate management.
melatonin is remarkably effective in preventing or reducing jet lag, and occasional short-term use appears to be safe. it should be recommended to adult travellers flying across five or more time zones, particularly in an easterly direction, and especially if they have experienced jet lag on previous journeys. travellers crossing 2-4 time zones can also use it if need be. the pharmacology and toxicology of melatonin needs systematic study, and routine pharmaceutical quality control of melatonin products must be established. the effects of melatonin in people with epilepsy, and a possible interaction with warfarin, need investigation.
there is very low-quality evidence that removal from exposure improves asthma symptoms and lung function compared with continued exposure. reducing exposure also improves symptoms, but seems not as effective as complete removal. however, removal from exposure is associated with an increased risk of unemployment, whereas reduction of exposure is not. the clinical benefit of removal from exposure or exposure reduction should be balanced against the increased risk of unemployment. we need better studies to identify which interventions intended to reduce exposure give most benefit.
the selected trials provide limited evidence that radiofrequency denervation offers short-term relief for chronic neck pain of zygapophyseal joint origin and for chronic cervicobrachial pain; conflicting evidence on the short-term effect of radiofrequency lesioning on pain and disability in chronic low-back pain of zygapophyseal joint origin; and limited evidence that intradiscal radiofrequency thermocoagulation is not effective for chronic discogenic low-back pain. there is a need for further high-quality rcts with larger patient samples and data on long-term effects, for which current evidence is inconclusive. furthermore, rcts are needed in non-spinal indications where radiofrequency denervation is currently used without any scientific evidence.
sutures were significantly better than tissue adhesives for minimising dehiscence and were found to be significantly faster to use. although surgeons may consider the use of tissue adhesives as an alternative to other methods of surgical site closure in the operating theatre they must be aware that adhesives may take more time to apply and that if higher tension is needed upon an incision, sutures may minimise dehiscence. there is a need for more well designed randomised controlled trials comparing tissue adhesives and alternative methods of closure. these trials should include people whose health may interfere with wound healing and surgical sites of high tension.
the included trial lacked statistical power due to the small number of women in each group and the low number of observed events. therefore in the absence of reliable evidence regarding the effectiveness and safety of the two surgical techniques for the management of vulval intraepithelial neoplasia precludes any definitive guidance or recommendations for clinical practice.
fluoride toothpastes in comparison to mouthrinses or gels appear to have a similar degree of effectiveness for the prevention of dental caries in children. there is no clear suggestion that fluoride varnish is more effective than mouthrinses and the evidence for the comparative effectiveness of fluoride varnishes and gels, and mouthrinses and gels is inconclusive. no conclusions about adverse effects could be reached, because no data were reported on in the trials. acceptance is likely to be greater for fluoride toothpaste.
there is no evidence to either claim or refute a difference in survival between bonded and non-bonded amalgam restorations. this review only found one methodologically sound but somewhat under-reported trial. this trial did not find any significant difference in the in-service performance of moderately sized adhesively bonded amalgam restorations, in terms of their survival rate and marginal integrity, in comparison to non-bonded amalgam restorations over a 2-year period. in view of the lack of evidence on the additional benefit of adhesively bonding amalgam in comparison with non-bonded amalgam, it is important that clinicians are mindful of the additional costs that may be incurred.
participant numbers in each comparison were small and we found no clear differences between fluspirilene and oral medication or other depots. the choice of whether to use fluspirilene as a depot medication and whether it has advantages over other depots cannot, at present, be informed by trial-derived data. well-conducted and reported randomised trials are still needed to inform practice.
low-intensity critical appraisal teaching interventions in healthcare populations may result in modest gains. improvements to research examining the effectiveness of interventions in healthcare populations are required; specifically rigorous randomised trials employing interventions using appropriate adult learning theories.
based on the one available trial, we could draw no firm conclusion for the effectiveness of supplementary antioxidant micronutrients for the prevention of kwashiorkor in pre-school children.
limited evidence from small trials suggested a lack of benefit of g-csf therapy in patients with ami. since data of the risk of bias regarding blinding of personnel were not conclusive, larger rcts with appropriate power calculations and longer follow up durations are required in order to address current uncertainties regarding the clinical efficacy and therapy-related adverse events of g-csf treatment.
some preventative treatments may benefit people at high risk of developing nmsc, but the ability to draw firm conclusions is limited by small numbers of trials, often with one trial per intervention or with inconsistent results between studies.
no recommendations for practice can be made at this time because the effectiveness of massage for neck pain remains uncertain. as a stand-alone treatment, massage for mnd was found to provide an immediate or short-term effectiveness or both in pain and tenderness. additionally, future research is needed in order to assess the long-term effects of treatment and treatments provided on more than one occasion.
the analysis of this review suggests that there is an overall survival benefit with radical surgery compared to radical radiotherapy in patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. however, it must be considered that only three trials were included for analysis, the patients numbers were small and that many patients did not receive the treatment they were randomised to. it must also be noted that many improvements in both radiotherapy and surgery have taken place since the initiation of these trials.
this updated review reports on 15 studies that met the inclusion criteria (nine studies from this update and six studies from the 2008 update). although these studies reported some positive outcomes, due to the small number of studies and the heterogeneity of interventions and outcome measures, it is not possible to draw generalisable inferences about the key elements of ipe and its effectiveness. to improve the quality of evidence relating to ipe and patient outcomes or healthcare process outcomes, the following three gaps will need to be filled: first, studies that assess the effectiveness of ipe interventions compared to separate, profession-specific interventions; second, rct, cba or its studies with qualitative strands examining processes relating to the ipe and practice changes; third, cost-benefit analyses.
there is limited and very low quality evidence of benefit for all of a diverse collection of exercise and mobilisation interventions for cts. people with cts who indicate a preference for exercise or mobilisation interventions should be informed of the limited evidence of effectiveness and safety of this intervention by their treatment provider. until more high quality randomised controlled trials assessing the effectiveness and safety of various exercise and mobilisation interventions compared to other non-surgical interventions are undertaken, the decision to provide this type of non-surgical intervention to people with cts should be based on the clinician's expertise in being able to deliver these treatments and patient's preferences.
based on available evidence, initiation of statin therapy within 14 days following acs does not reduce death, myocardial infarction, or stroke up to four months, but reduces the occurrence of unstable angina at four months following acs.
zotepine may be a valuable addition to the class of atypical antipsychotic drugs. however, more data from existing studies is urgently needed to increase confidence in the findings of this review. in addition to this, new data from well planned, conducted and reported long term pragmatic randomised trials are needed. otherwise clinical use of zotepine will be based upon speculation of short explanatory trials for everyday practice.
as current clinical evidence is based on only one single rct as well as case series and reports, intravenous lidocaine must be considered a pharmacological agent under investigation in burns care, the effectiveness of which is yet to be determined with further well-designed and conducted clinical trials.
trial-based evidence suggests no clear and convincing advantage for cognitive behavioural therapy over other - and sometime much less sophisticated - therapies for people with schizophrenia.
there is conflicting evidence regarding the efficacy of prolotherapy injections for patients with chronic low-back pain. when used alone, prolotherapy is not an effective treatment for chronic low-back pain. when combined with spinal manipulation, exercise, and other co-interventions, prolotherapy may improve chronic low-back pain and disability. conclusions are confounded by clinical heterogeneity amongst studies and by the presence of co-interventions.
the limited number of studies to date suggests that trained community pharmacists, providing a counselling and record keeping support programme for their customers, may have a positive effect on smoking cessation rates. the strength of evidence is limited because only one of the trials showed a statistically significant effect.
until good quality rcts are carried out, there is insufficient evidence to indicate whether children with kawasaki disease should continue to receive salicylate as part of their treatment regimen.
omalizumab was significantly more effective than placebo at increasing the numbers of patients who were able to reduce or withdraw their inhaled steroids, but the clinical value of the reduction in steroid consumption has be considered in the light of the high cost of omalizumab. the impressive placebo effects observed in control groups bring into question the true effect of omalizumab. omalizumab was effective in reducing asthma exacerbations as an adjunctive therapy to inhaled steroids, and during steroid tapering phases of clinical trials. omalizumab was generally well tolerated, although there were more injection site reactions with omalizumab. patient and physician assessments of the drug were positive. further assessment in paediatric populations is necessary, as is direct double-dummy comparison with ics.
budesonide is not more effective than placebo or weaning prednisolone for maintenance of remission in crohn's disease. some modest benefits are noted in patients receiving budesonide compared with placebo in terms of lower cdai scores and longer time to relapse of disease. however, these benefits are offset by higher treatment-related adverse event rates and more frequent adrenocorticoid suppression in patients receiving budesonide. therefore, budesonide is not recommended for maintenance of remission in crohn's disease.
the overall patient benefit from adding bevacizumab to first- and second-line chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer can at best be considered as modest. it is dependent on the type of chemotherapy used and limited to a prolongation of pfs and response rates in both first- and second-line therapy, both surrogate parameters. in contrast, bevacizumab has no significant impact on the patient-related secondary outcomes of os or qol, which indicate a direct patient benefit. for this reason, the clinical value of bevacizumab for metastatic breast cancer remains controversial.
this review suggests that the evidence for detrimental effects of procaine and its preparations is stronger than the evidence for benefit in preventing and/or treating dementia or cognitive impairment. there is some evidence from older studies that procaine preparations might improve memory in persons without cognitive impairment. however, the clear evidence of side effects suggests that the risks might outweigh the benefits. in the light of this, the strong marketing claims for procaine preparations should be withdrawn until trials of adequate size, duration and quality have been conducted.
insufficient data were available from randomized trials to establish if statins are safe and effective in cases of acute ischemic stroke and tia.
there was no evidence to indicate that clomiphene with gonadotropins (with or without gnrh antagonist) differed significantly from gonadotropins in gnrh agonist protocols for women undergoing ivf treatment, in terms of live births or pregnancy rates. meanwhile, use of clomiphene led to a reduction in the incidence of ohss. however, these results were based on data from a small number of underpowered randomised trials with few participants. hence there was insufficient evidence to recommend use of clomiphene citrate in routine ivf practice. larger trials with adequate power are required.
the limited evidence available shows no significant benefit of using post-operative wound drains in reduction mammoplasty, though hospital stay may be shorter when drains are not used. no data are available for breast augmentation or breast reconstruction, and this requires investigation.
these limited data suggest that higher doses of thrombolytic agents may lead to higher rates of bleeding. however, the evidence is inadequate to conclude whether lower doses of thrombolytic agents are more effective than higher doses, or whether one agent is better than another, or which route of administration is the best, for acute ischaemic stroke. at present, intravenous rt-pa at 0.9mg/kg as licensed in many countries appears to represent best practice and other drugs, doses or routes of administration should only be used in randomised controlled trials.
side hole catheters should be avoided for umbilical arterial catheterisation in the newborn.
in preterm infants with low systemic blood flow, there is some evidence that dobutamine is better than dopamine at increasing and maintaining systemic blood flow. the only eligible trial did not demonstrate any consistent differences in clinical outcomes. however, this study was not sufficiently powered to prove or disprove effects on clinical outcomes. it is unclear what is the most effective strategy for improving the cardiovascular status of immature infants in the first day. further trials are needed to determine effective strategies for preventing and improving low systemic and organ blood flow.
there is currently insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials that the use of dopamine in term infants with suspected perinatal asphyxia improves mortality or long-term neurodevelopmental outcome. the question of whether dopamine improves outcome for term infants with suspected perinatal asphyxia has not been answered. further research is required to determine whether or not the use of dopamine improves mortality and long-term morbidity for these infants and if so, issues such as which infants, at what dose and with what co-interventions should be addressed.
available evidence does not allow robust conclusions regarding the efficacy of antiepileptic drugs other than gabapentin, pregabalin, topiramate, and valproate in the prophylaxis of episodic migraine among adults. acetazolamide, carisbamate, clonazepam, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, and vigabatrin were not more effective than placebo in reducing headache frequency. in one trial each, carbamazepine and levetiracetam were significantly superior to placebo in reducing headache frequency, and there was no significant difference in proportion of responders between zonisamide and active comparator. these three positive studies suffer from considerable methodological limitations.
amitriptyline has been a first-line treatment for neuropathic pain for many years. the fact that there is no supportive unbiased evidence for a beneficial effect is disappointing, but has to be balanced against decades of successful treatment in many patients with neuropathic pain or fibromyalgia. there is no good evidence of a lack of effect; rather our concern should be of overestimation of treatment effect. amitriptyline should continue to be used as part of the treatment of neuropathic pain or fibromyalgia, but only a minority of patients will achieve satisfactory pain relief. limited information suggests that failure with one antidepressant does not mean failure with all. it is unlikely that any large randomised trials of amitriptyline will be conducted in specific neuropathic pain conditions or in fibromyalgia to prove efficacy.
pregabalin, when used as an add-on drug for treatment-resistant partial epilepsy, is significantly more effective than placebo at achieving a 50% or greater seizure reduction and significantly increasing seizure freedom. results demonstrate efficacy for doses from 150 mg/day to 600 mg/day, with increasing effectiveness at 600 mg doses. the trials included in this review were of short duration and longer-term trials are needed to inform clinical decision making better.
at this time, the evidence indicates that there is no benefit of advanced life support training for ambulance crews.
there still remains considerable uncertainty about which forms of psychosocial and physical treatments of self-harm patients are most effective, inclusion of insufficient numbers of patients in trials being the main limiting factor. there is a need for larger trials of treatments associated with trends towards reduced rates of repetition of deliberate self-harm. the results of small single trials which have been associated with statistically significant reductions in repetition must be interpreted with caution and it is desirable that such trials are also replicated.
muscle relaxants are effective in the management of non-specific low back pain, but the adverse effects require that they be used with caution. trials are needed that evaluate if muscle relaxants are more effective than analgesics or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
in previous reviews, we encouraged researchers to undertake well-designed trials to confirm or refute the effectiveness of ivig in reducing adverse outcomes in neonates with suspected infection. such a trial has been undertaken. results of the inis trial, which enrolled 3493 infants, carry a heavy weight in the current update of this review, and the undisputed results show no reduction in death or major disability at 2 years of age. routine administration of ivig to prevent mortality in infants with suspected or proven neonatal infection is not recommended.
the limited data we found available suggests that this is no evidence of a difference in outcomes between the oral contraceptive pill (ocp) studied and gnrh analogue was as effective as a gnrh analogue in treating for endometriosis-associated painful symptoms of endometriosis. however, the lack of studies with larger sample sizes, or focusing on other comparable treatments is concerning and further research is needed to fully evaluate fully the role of ocps oral contraceptive pills in managing symptoms associated with endometriosis.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials and well conducted controlled before and after studies to determine the effect of interventions administered in the alcohol server setting on injuries. compliance with interventions appears to be a problem; hence mandated interventions may be more likely to show an effect. randomised controlled trials, with adequate allocation concealment and blinding are required to improve the evidence base. further well-conducted, non-randomised trials are also needed when random allocation is not feasible.
there is not enough evidence to support the routine use of marine oil, or other prostaglandin precursor, supplements during pregnancy to reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia, preterm birth, low birthweight or small-for-gestational age.
clonidine and lofexidine are more effective than placebo for the management of withdrawal from heroin or methadone. no significant difference in efficacy was detected for treatment regimes based on clonidine or lofexidine, and those based on reducing doses of methadone over a period of around 10 days but methadone is associated with fewer adverse effects than clonidine, and lofexidine has a better safety profile than clonidine.
based on mostly descriptive analysis, topical anaesthetics are possibly an efficacious, non-invasive means of providing analgesia prior to suturing of dermal lacerations. however, additional well designed rcts with low risk of bias are necessary before definitive conclusions can be made.
the evidence from rcts to support the view that the application of mistletoe extracts has impact on survival or leads to an improved ability to fight cancer or to withstand anticancer treatments is weak. nevertheless, there is some evidence that mistletoe extracts may offer benefits on measures of qol during chemotherapy for breast cancer, but these results need replication. overall, more high quality, independent clinical research is needed to truly assess the safety and effectiveness of mistletoe extracts. patients receiving mistletoe therapy should be encouraged to take part in future trails.
itns have a beneficial impact on pregnancy outcome in malaria-endemic regions of africa when used by communities or by individual women. no further trials of itns in pregnancy are required in sub-saharan africa. further evaluation of the potential impact of itns is required in areas with less intense and plasmodium vivax transmission in asia and latin america.
the evidence to date suggests that nsaids are superior to acetaminophen for improving knee and hip pain in people with oa. the size of the treatment effect was modest, and the median trial duration was only six weeks, therefore, additional considerations need to be factored in when making the decision between using acetaminophen or nsaids. in oa subjects with moderate-to-severe levels of pain, nsaids appear to be more effective than acetaminophen.
ivig, thymosin, oral transfer factor, bcg vaccine, huangqi granules and tiaojining may have positive effects on the prevention of nosocomial or unspecified infection with no obvious serious adverse events in children with nephrotic syndrome. however the methodological quality of all studies was poor, the sample sizes small, and all studies were from china, and thus there is no strong evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions.
potential benefits of cryotherapy on blood loss, postoperative pain, and range of motion may be too small to justify its use, and the quality of the evidence was very low or low for all main outcomes. this needs to be balanced against potential inconveniences and expenses of using cryotherapy. well designed randomised trials are required to improve the quality of the evidence.
there is very little evidence for the effectiveness of amfetamine for adhd in people with id . prescribing in this population is based on extrapolation of research in people without id. more research into effectiveness and tolerability is urgently needed.
currently there is no evidence of the effectiveness of tdcs (anodal tdcs, cathodal tdcs) versus control (sham tdcs). however, it appears that cathodal tdcs over the non-lesioned hemisphere might be the most promising approach.
there is now some evidence available indicating a positive effect of pfmt for prolapse symptoms and severity. the largest most rigorous trial to date suggests that six months of supervised pfmt has benefits in terms of anatomical and symptom improvement (if symptomatic) immediately post-intervention. further evidence relating to effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of pfmt, of different intensities, for symptomatic prolapse in the medium and long term is needed. a large trial of pfmt supplementing surgery is needed to give clear evidence about the usefulness of combining these treatments. other comparisons which have not been addressed in trials to date and warrant consideration include those involving lifestyle change interventions, and trials aimed at prolapse prevention.
cyclosporine has an important clinical benefit in the short-term (up to one year) treatment of patients with progressive rheumatoid arthritis.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend statins for the treatment of dementia. analysis from the studies available, including one large rct, indicate statins have no benefit on the outcome measures adas-cog or mmse. we need to await full results from clasp 2008 before we can be certain. this cochrane review will be updated as these results become available.
routine use of sweeping of membranes from 38 weeks of pregnancy onwards does not seem to produce clinically important benefits. when used as a means for induction of labour, the reduction in the use of more formal methods of induction needs to be balanced against women's discomfort and other adverse effects. [note: the 11 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the limited evidence from randomised controlled trials (rcts) included in this review suggests that, while it is possible that injectable polyvalent pneumococcal vaccines may provide some protection against morbidity in persons with copd, no significant effect on any of the outcomes was shown. further large rcts in this population would be needed to confirm effectiveness of the vaccine suggested by results from longitudinal studies.
adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy is effective in prolonging the survival of the majority of patients who are assessed as having early (figo stage i/iia) epithelial ovarian cancer. however, it may be withheld from women in whom there is well-differentiated encapsulated unilateral disease (stage 1a grade 1) or those with comprehensively staged ib, well or moderately differentiated (grade 1/2) disease. others with unstaged early disease or those with poorly differentiated tumours should be offered chemotherapy. a pragmatic approach may be necessary in clinical settings where optimal staging is not normally performed/achieved. in such settings, adjuvant chemotherapy may be withheld from those with encapsulated stage ia grade 1 serous and endometrioid carcinoma and offered to all others with early stage disease.
this review confirms the benefits of using fluoride toothpaste in preventing caries in children and adolescents when compared to placebo, but only significantly for fluoride concentrations of 1000 ppm and above. the relative caries preventive effects of fluoride toothpastes of different concentrations increase with higher fluoride concentration. the decision of what fluoride levels to use for children under 6 years should be balanced with the risk of fluorosis.
there is some evidence that one-to-one dietary interventions in the dental setting can change behaviour, although the evidence is greater for interventions aiming to change fruit/vegetable and alcohol consumption than for those aiming to change dietary sugar consumption. there is a need for more studies, particularly in the dental practice setting, as well as greater methodological rigour in the design, statistical analysis and reporting of such studies.
currently there are very few proven interventions to reduce pain and discomfort of screening mammography, especially procedures that can be readily introduced to screening programmes. with mammography continuing as the preferred method for breast screening, more research on such interventions is needed.
the rapid negative pressure application for vacuum assisted vaginal birth reduces duration of the procedure whilst there is no evidence of differences in maternal and neonatal outcomes. rapid method of negative application should be recommended for vacuum extraction assisted vaginal delivery.
it is currently unclear whether or not inositol is of benefit in the treatment of depression. ongoing studies should reduce this uncertainty.
handsearching still has a valuable role to play in identifying reports of randomized trials for inclusion in systematic reviews of health care interventions, particularly in identifying trials reported as abstracts, letters and those published in languages other than english, together with all reports published in journals not indexed in electronic databases. however, where time and resources are limited, searching an electronic database using a complex search (or the cochrane hsss) will identify the majority of trials published as full reports in english language journals, provided, of course, that the relevant journals have been indexed in the database.
despite identifying eight new trials there is currently no clear evidence supporting the use of any intervention in mitochondrial disorders. further research is needed to establish the role of a wide range of therapeutic approaches. we suggest further research should identify novel agents to be tested in homogeneous study populations with clinically relevant primary endpoints.
in view of the significant excess toxicity, lack of progression or survival benefit and the availability of less toxic active agents it is difficult to justify the use of platinum-containing regimens, particularly as first line treatment for women with metastatic breast cancer in routine clinical practice. ongoing trials are examining the possibility of synergy between platins and trastuzamab, a monoclonal antibody treatment. no randomised trials containing oxalplatin were identified for the present review.
there is little evidence to support the use of pre-operative education over and above standard care to improve postoperative outcomes in patients undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery, especially with respect to pain, functioning and length of hospital stay. there is evidence that preoperative education has a modest beneficial effect on preoperative anxiety. there may also be beneficial effects when preoperative education is tailored according to anxiety, or targeted at those most in need of support (e.g. those who are particularly disabled, or have limited social support structures).
what little evidence there is from controlled trials does not support a beneficial effect of dhea supplementation on cognitive function of non-demented middle-aged or elderly people. there is inconsistent evidence from the controlled trials about adverse effects of dhea. in view of growing public enthusiasm for dhea supplementation, particularly in the usa, and the theoretical possibility of long-term neuroprotective effects of dhea there is a need for further high quality trials in which the duration of dhea treatment is longer than one year, and the number of participants is large enough to provide adequate statistical power. cognitive outcomes should be assessed in all trials.
this systematic review did not demonstrate any significant benefits of ursodeoxycholic acid on all-cause mortality, all-cause mortality or liver transplantation, pruritus, or fatigue in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. ursodeoxycholic acid seemed to have a beneficial effect on liver biochemistry measures and on histological progression compared with the control group. all but one of the included trials had high risk of bias, and there are risks of outcome reporting bias and risks of random errors as well. randomised trials with low risk of bias and low risks of random errors examining the effects of ursodeoxycholic acid for primary biliary cirrhosis are needed.
on the basis of the evidence in this review, no specific implications for practice are made. it is recommended, in general, that more, larger studies are done on et preparation techniques. the studies need to be of a higher quality with better explained methods, more specified inclusion and exclusion criteria, and more participants.
there is limited evidence suggesting that restenosis/reocclusion at six months following peripheral endovascular treatment is reduced by use of antiplatelet drugs compared with placebo/control, but associated information on bleeding and gastrointestinal side effects is lacking. there is also some evidence of variation in effect according to different drugs with cilostazol reducing reocclusion/restenosis at 12 months compared with ticlopidine and both lmwh and batroxobin combined with aspirin appearing beneficial compared with aspirin alone. however, available trials are generally small and of variable quality and side effects of drugs are not consistently addressed. further good quality, large-scale rcts, stratified by severity of disease, are required.
there is very little evidence from trials in children. in adults with asthma on daily maintenance ics, a self-initiated ics increase to 1000 to 2000 mcg/day at the onset of an exacerbation is not associated with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of exacerbations requiring rescue oral corticosteroids. more research is needed to assess the effectiveness of increased ics doses at the onset of asthma exacerbations (particularly in children).
there is no evidence to support the effectiveness of memory rehabilitation on memory function or functional abilities in patients with ms. however, this conclusion has been arrived because of the limited quality of some of the primary studies reviewed in this area. further robust, rcts of higher methodological quality and better quality of reporting are needed.
antibiotic prophylaxis given during the second or third trimester of pregnancy reduces the risk of prelabour rupture of membranes and postpartum endometritis when given routinely to pregnant women. however there was also a possible substantial bias in the review's results because of a high rate of loss to follow up and small numbers of studies for each of our analyses. so we conclude that there is not enough evidence to recommend the use of routine antibiotics during pregnancy to prevent infectious adverse effect on pregnancy outcomes.
available evidence from rcts shows that routine short-term cysteine chloride supplementation of cysteine-free pn in preterm infants improves nitrogen balance. however, there is insufficient evidence to assess the risks of cysteine supplementation, especially regarding metabolic acidosis, which has been reported during the first two weeks of cysteine chloride administration. available evidence from a large rct trial does not support routine n-acetylcysteine supplementation of cysteine-containing pn in extremely low birth weight infants.
dietary supplements of fibre in the form of bran or wheat fibre are likely to help women experiencing constipation in pregnancy. if the problem fails to resolve, stimulant laxatives are likely to prove more effective.
care based on crisis intervention principles, with or without an ongoing home care package, appears to be a viable and acceptable way of treating people with serious mental illnesses. if this approach is to be widely implemented it would seem that more evaluative studies are still needed.
for vas occlusion with clips or vasectomy with vas irrigation, no conclusions can be made as those studies were of low quality and underpowered. fascial interposition reduced vasectomy failure. an intra-vas device was less effective in reducing sperm count than was no-scalpel vasectomy. rcts examining other vasectomy techniques were not available. more and better quality research is needed to examine vasectomy techniques.
there is insufficient evidence for concluding superiority, inferiority or equivalence of high dose ppi treatment over lower doses in peptic ulcer bleeding.
the present evidence suggests that cm strategies are effective in improving retention of pregnant women in illicit drug treatment programs as well as in transiently reducing illicit drug use. there is insufficient evidence to support the use of mi. overall the available evidence has low numbers and, therefore, it is impossible to accurately assess the effect of psychosocial interventions on obstetrical and neonatal outcomes.it is important to develop a better evidence base to evaluate psychosocial modalities of treatment in this important population.
overall, based on 'silver-level' evidence (www.cochranemsk.org) there was no clinically important or statistically significant evidence that exercise therapy can improve functional ability, quality of life, aerobic capacity or pain. the low number of available rcts limits the generalisability. the included and excluded studies were all consistent about the adverse effects of exercise therapy; no short-term detrimental effects of exercise therapy were found in any study. both included and excluded studies showed that exercise does not exacerbate arthritis. the large heterogeneity in outcome measures, as seen in this review, emphasises the need for a standardised assessment or a core set of functional and physical outcome measurements suited for health research to generate evidence about the possible benefits of exercise therapy for patients with jia. although the short-term effects look promising, the long-term effect of exercise therapy remains unclear.
all trials were of good methodological quality with no risk of bias. this meta-analysis of chemotherapy in the supportive care setting demonstrates that chemotherapy improves overall survival in all patients with advanced nsclc. patients who are fit enough and wish to receive it should be offered chemotherapy.
in this update, the strength of evidence for effectiveness outcomes was improved from low to moderate and we confirmed that the symptomatic benefit of doxycycline is minimal to non-existent, while the small benefit in terms of joint space narrowing is of questionable clinical relevance and outweighed by safety problems. the cis of the summary estimates now exclude any clinically relevant difference in improvement of symptoms and the small benefit in terms of joint space narrowing does not outweigh the harms.
tranexamic acid safely reduces mortality in bleeding trauma patients without increasing the risk of adverse events. txa should be given as early as possible and within three hours of injury, as treatment later than this is unlikely to be effective. further trials are needed to determine the effects of txa in patients with isolated traumatic brain injury.
acupuncture may reduce period pain, however there is a need for further well-designed randomised controlled trials.
intravenous amphotericin b was the only antifungal agent that reduced total mortality. it should therefore be preferred when prophylactic or empirical antifungal therapy in cancer patients with neutropenia is instituted.
there is limited evidence for the effectiveness of bypass surgery compared with other treatments; no studies compared bypass to no treatment. further large trials are required.
in this update, we could not confirm that transcutaneous electrostimulation is effective for pain relief. the current systematic review is inconclusive, hampered by the inclusion of only small trials of questionable quality. appropriately designed trials of adequate power are warranted.
there is some evidence of a caries-inhibiting effect of slow-release fluoride glass beads. this evidence is regarded as weak and unreliable because the results were from participants selected on the basis of bead retention rather than an intention-to-treat analysis.
meta-analysis revealed a significant difference in favour of rhigf-i treatment; however, the quality of the evidence from the two included trials was low. a third study showed no difference between treatment and placebo. there is no evidence for increase in survival with igf1. all three included trials were at high risk of bias.
although there is a lack of available evidence to inform practice for undisplaced intracapsular fractures, variation in practice has reduced and most fractures are treated surgically. the limited available evidence from randomised trials does not suggest major differences in outcome between conservative and operative management programmes for extracapsular femoral fractures, but operative treatment is associated with a reduced length of hospital stay and improved rehabilitation. conservative treatment will be acceptable where modern surgical facilities are unavailable, and will result in a reduction in complications associated with surgery, but rehabilitation is likely to be slower and limb deformity more common. currently, it is difficult to conceive circumstances in which future trials would be practical or viable.
colesevelam added on to antidiabetic agents showed significant effects on glycaemic control. however, there is a limited number of studies with the different colesevelam/antidiabetic agent combinations. more information on the benefit-risk ratio of colesevelam treatment is necessary to assess the long-term effects, particularly in the management of cardiovascular risks as well as the reduction in micro- and macrovascular complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus. furthermore, long-term data on health-related quality of life and all-cause mortality also need to be investigated.
acyclovir appears to be effective in reducing the number of days with fever and the maximum number of lesions among otherwise healthy children with chickenpox. the results were less convincing with respect to the number of days to no new lesions and relief of itchiness. the clinical importance of acyclovir treatment in otherwise healthy children remains uncertain.
intravenous prostaglandin is no more efficient than intravenous oxytocin for the induction of labour but its use is associated with higher rates of maternal side-effects and uterine hyperstimulation. no conclusions can be drawn form the comparisons of combination of prostaglandin f2 alpha and oxytocin compared to oxytocin alone or extra-amniotic and intravenous prostaglandin e2. [note: the two citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
currently, there is no evidence that three dimensional image is superior to two dimensional image in laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
in the management of the motor complications seen in parkinson's disease, tolcapone and entacapone can be used to reduce off time, reduce levodopa dose, and modestly improve motor impairment and disability. this is based on, at best, medium term evidence. however some participants on tolcapone had raised liver enzymes. this combined with three cases of fatal hepatic toxicity found during post-marketing surveillance has raised concerns over the safety of tolcapone.
the results of this meta-analysis support the use of 5-fu based postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy for patients undergoing apparently radical surgery for non-metastatic rectal carcinoma. available data do not allow us to define whether the efficacy of this treatment is highest in one specific tnm stage. the implementation of modern anti-cancer agents in the adjuvant setting is warranted to improve the results shown by this meta-analysis. randomized trials of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients receiving preoperative neoadjuvant therapy are also needed in order to define the role of postoperative chemotherapy in the multimodal treatment of resectable rectal cancer.
it is not clear whether there are any advantages of lipid-based formulations if conventional amphotericin b is administered under optimal circumstances and their high cost prohibits routine use in most settings. there is a need for large trials comparing lipid-based formulations of amphotericin b with conventional amphotericin b given in the same dose, with routine premedication for prevention of infusion-related toxicity, and with supplementation with fluid, potassium and magnesium for prevention of nephrotoxicity.
computer-based diabetes self-management interventions to manage type 2 diabetes appear to have a small beneficial effect on blood glucose control and the effect was larger in the mobile phone subgroup. there is no evidence to show benefits in other biological outcomes or any cognitive, behavioural or emotional outcomes.
this review confirms clinical experience and quantifies the risks of stopping chlorpromazine medication for a group of people with schizophrenia who are stable on this drug. with its moderate adverse effects, chlorpromazine is likely to remain one of the most widely prescribed treatments for schizophrenia.
there is insufficient evidence neither to confirm nor exclude both beneficial and harmful effects of glucocorticosteroids for chronic hepatitis c with or without autoimmune disorders. this review is not able to rule out potential serious adverse effects of glucocorticosteroids. therefore, this review cannot establish whether glucocorticosteroids treatment can be safely administrated for indications requiring glucocorticosteroids without analysing for hepatitis c virus. the effect of glucocorticosteroids for acute hepatitis c has not been examined in randomised trials.
prophylactic application of topical ointment increases the risk of coagulase negative staphylococcal infection and any nosocomial infection. a trend toward increased risk of any bacterial infection was noted in infants prophylactically treated. topical ointment should not be used routinely in preterm infants.
physical training is safe for people with ild. improvements in functional exercise capacity, dyspnoea and quality of life are seen immediately following training, with benefits also evident in ipf. there is little evidence regarding longer-term effects of physical training.
available evidence suggests that behavioral interventions for tobacco cessation conducted by oral health professionals incorporating an oral examination component in the dental office or community setting may increase tobacco abstinence rates among both cigarette smokers and smokeless tobacco users. differences between the studies limit the ability to make conclusive recommendations regarding the intervention components that should be incorporated into clinical practice, however, behavioral counselling (typically brief) in conjunction with an oral examination was a consistent intervention component that was also provided in some control groups.
there is no convincing evidence of the benefit of dietary supplements in eczema, and they cannot be recommended for the public or for clinical practice at present. whilst some may argue that at least supplements do not do any harm, high doses of vitamin d may give rise to serious medical problems, and the cost of long-term supplements may also mount up.
this updated cochrane review provides evidence that rhuepo compared with placebo does not reduce mortality, does not reduce transfusion requirements, did not increase hemoglobin levels, and did not improve quality of life in hiv-infected patients with anemia. the results are based on six rcts with high risk of bias. therefore prescription of this intervention for treating anemia in patients with aids is not justified, unless new evidence from a large high quality trial alters this conclusion.
there is insufficient evidence that ics therapy provides additional benefit when used in combination with standard systemic corticosteroid therapy upon ed discharge for acute asthma. there is some evidence that high-dose ics therapy alone may be as effective as oral corticosteroid therapy when used in mild asthmatics upon ed discharge; however, the confidence intervals were too wide to be confident of equal effectiveness. further research is needed to clarify whether ics therapy should be employed in acute asthma treatment following ed discharge. the review does not suggest any reason to stop usual treatment with ics following ed discharge, even if a course of oral corticosteroids are prescribed.
results from individual studies suggested that patients have a better recovery profile after propofol sedation for ercp procedures than after midazolam and meperidine sedation. as there was no difference between the two sedation techniques as regards safety, propofol sedation is probably preferred for patients undergoing ercp procedures. however, in all of the studies that were identified only non-anaesthesia personnel were involved in administering the sedation. it would be helpful if further research was conducted where anaesthesia personnel were involved in the administration of sedation for ercp procedures. this would clarify the extent to which anaesthesia personnel should be involved in the administration of propofol sedation.
memantine has a small beneficial effect at six months in moderate to severe ad. in patients with mild to moderate dementia, the small beneficial effect on cognition was not clinically detectable in those with vascular dementia and was detectable in those with ad. memantine is well tolerated.
in patients with ct-proven primary supratentorial intracerebral haemorrhage, surgery added to medical management reduces the odds of being dead or dependent compared with medical management alone, but the result is not very robust. hence, further randomised trials to identify which patients benefit from surgery and to evaluate less invasive methods are indicated.
supervised exercise therapy is suggested to have clinically relevant benefits compared with non-supervised regimens, which is the main prescribed exercise therapy for people with intermittent claudication. however, the clinical relevance has not been demonstrated definitely and will require additional studies with a focus on the improvements in quality of life.
lubeluzole, given in the acute phase of ischaemic stroke, is not associated with a significant reduction of death or dependency at the end of scheduled follow-up period but seems to be associated with a significant increase of heart-conduction disorders (q-t prolonged > 450 msec).
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to determine which methods of conservative treatment are the most appropriate for acute middle third clavicle fractures in adolescents and adults. further research is warranted.
no evidence was found for the efficacy or safety of corticosteroids in treating childhood epilepsies. clinicians using steroids in childhood epilepsies, other than for epileptic spasms, should take this into account before using these agents.
tick-borne encephalitis vaccines appear to be highly immunogenic, but the relationship between seroconversion and clinical protection has not been established. although adverse effects were commonly reported, none were serious or life threatening.
there is only poor quality evidence from very limited data to suggest that therapeutic ultrasound may be more effective than placebo for either short- or long-term symptom improvement in people with cts. there is insufficient evidence to support the greater benefit of one type of therapeutic ultrasound regimen over another or to support the use of therapeutic ultrasound as a treatment with greater efficacy compared to other non-surgical interventions for cts, such as splinting, exercises, and oral drugs. more methodologically rigorous studies are needed to determine the effectiveness and safety of therapeutic ultrasound for cts.
we found very limited evidence that in certain cases mobile phone messaging interventions may support preventive health care, to improve health status and health behaviour outcomes. however, because of the low number of participants in three of the included studies, combined with study limitations of risk of bias and lack of demonstrated causality, the evidence for these effects is of low to moderate quality. the evidence is of high quality only for interventions aimed at smoking cessation. furthermore, there are significant information gaps regarding the long-term effects, risks and limitations of, and user satisfaction with, such interventions.
there is no high quality evidence on biopsy versus resection for hgg that can be used to guide management. the single included rct is of inadequate methodology to reach reliable conclusions. further large multi-centred rcts are required to conclusively answer the question of whether biopsy or resection is the best initial surgical management for hgg.
icb is a safe and simple technique for providing surgical anaesthesia of the lower arm, with an efficacy comparable to other bpbs. the advantages of icb include a lower likelihood of tourniquet pain during surgery, and more reliable blockade of the musculocutaneous and axillary nerves when compared to a single-injection axillary block. the efficacy of icb is likely to be improved if adequate time is allowed for block onset (at least 30 minutes) and if a volume of at least 40 ml is injected. since publication of many of the trials included in this review, it has become clear that a distal posterior cord motor response is the appropriate endpoint for electrostimulation-guided icb; we recommend it be used in all future comparative studies. there is also a need for additional rcts comparing ultrasound-guided icb with other bpbs.
this review did not provide strong evidence concerning the effectiveness of tcmhs for stopping bleeding from haemorrhoids. most of the included studies were of low quality and there was a scarcity of eligible trials and numbers of participants. limited, weak evidence showed that some herbal formulae, when including radix sanguisorbae, radix rehmanniae, fructus sophorae, radix angelicae sinensis, radix scutellariae, etc., may alleviate some symptoms caused by haemorrhoids. these include hematochezia, congestive haemorrhoidal cushions and inflammation of perianal mucosa in the short term. well-designed clinical trials are required urgently before any confident conclusions can be drawn about the value of tcmhs for stopping bleeding from haemorrhoids. at present, the evidence is not enough that clinical practice should be changed immediately on the basis of these results.
mind-body interventions might benefit women’s anxiety during pregnancy. based on individual studies, there is some but no strong evidence for the effectiveness of mind-body interventions for the management of anxiety during pregnancy. the main limitations of the studies were the lack of blinding and insufficient details on the methods used for randomization.
treatment with infliximab for 6 and 12 months significantly reduces ra disease activity and appeared to have an acceptable safety profile in these trials. total radiographic scores improved, fewer patients showed radiographic progression, and more patients showed radiographic improvement with infliximab treatment at 12 months compared to controls. however, only 2 trials met the inclusion criteria, and these results are largely driven by the largest trial. the available efficacy and toxicity data is relatively short-term (6-12 months). in order to detect rare events that may be associated with infliximab, larger and longer term studies are required.
this review shows evidence supporting the effectiveness of clomiphene citrate and clomiphene in combination with dexamethasone for pregnancy rate only. there is limited evidence on the effects of these drugs on outcomes such as miscarriage. evidence in favour of these interventions is flawed due to the lack of evidence on live births.
this review provides some evidence that interventions to improve excreta disposal are effective in preventing diarrhoeal disease. however, this conclusion is based primarily on the consistency of the evidence of beneficial effects. the quality of the evidence is generally poor and does not allow for quantification of any such effect. the wide range of estimates of the effects of the intervention may be due to clinical and methodological heterogeneity among the studies, as well as to other important differences, including exposure levels, types of interventions, and different degrees of observer and respondent bias. rigorous studies in multiple settings are needed to clarify the potential effectiveness of excreta disposal on diarrhoea.
np and npc seem to be similar in effectiveness and safety when used in patients with lrti. there is no single clinical sign or symptom that accurately identifies hypoxaemia. studies identifying the most effective and safe oxygen delivery method are needed.
the failure of the largest and best conducted studies to detect an effect on prevalence of smoking is disappointing. a community approach will remain an important part of health promotion activities, but designers of future programmes will need to take account of this limited effect in determining the scale of projects and the resources devoted to them.
vitamin k administered to women prior to very preterm birth has not been shown to significantly prevent pvh in preterm infants or improve neurodevelopmental outcomes in childhood.
no firm conclusions can be drawn at present about the effects of shared decision making interventions for people with mental health conditions. there is no evidence of harm, but there is an urgent need for further research in this area.
based on the present data, oral treatment is an acceptable alternative to intravenous antibiotic treatment in febrile neutropenic cancer patients (excluding patients with acute leukaemia) who are haemodynamically stable, without organ failure, not having pneumonia, infection of a central line or a severe soft-tissue infection. the wide ci for mortality allows the present use of oral treatment in groups of patients with an expected low risk for mortality, and further research should be aimed at clarifying the definition of low risk patients.
the scarcity of available studies and their heterogeneity makes it difficult to reach any firm conclusions. the review findings suggest supplementary feeding has a negligible impact on child growth; however, the pooled results should be interpreted with great caution because the studies included in the review are clinically diverse. future studies should address issues of research design, including sample size calculation, to detect meaningful clinical effects and adequate intervention allocation concealment. in the meantime, families and children in need should be provided appropriate feeding, health care and sanitation without waiting for new rcts to establish a research basis for feeding children.
there is little randomised evidence comparing amisulpride with other second generation antipsychotic drugs. we could only find trials comparing amisulpride with olanzapine, risperidone and ziprasidone. we found amisulpride may be somewhat more effective than ziprasidone, and more tolerable in terms of weight gain and other associated problems than olanzapine and risperidone. these data, however, are based on only ten short to medium term studies and therefore too limited to allow for firm conclusions. note: the 47 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
systematic and opportunistic screening for af increase the rate of detection of new cases compared with routine practice. while both approaches have a comparable effect on the overall af diagnosis rate, the cost of systematic screening is significantly more than that of opportunistic screening from the perspective of the health service provider. the lack of studies investigating the effect of screening in other health systems and younger age groups means that caution needs to be exercised in relation to the transferability of these results beyond the setting and population in which the included study was conducted. additional research is needed to examine the effectiveness of alternative screening strategies and to investigate the effect of the intervention on the risk of stroke for screened versus non-screened populations.
there is currently a very small amount of evidence assessing the effects of dietary interventions intended as part of a wide-ranging weight-loss programme. whilst we are unable to recommend these strategies as concomitant interventions with drug-based therapy for the specific management of asthma, dietary interventions such as weight-loss programmes may provide benefits in specific patients. however, the impact of a calorie-controlled diet on the signs and symptoms of asthma in the general asthmatic population is yet to be established.
the short-term benefits for babies of less respiratory distress and fewer serious health problems in the first few weeks after birth support the use of repeat dose(s) of prenatal corticosteroids for women still at risk of preterm birth seven days or more after an initial course. these benefits were associated with a small reduction in size at birth. the current available evidence reassuringly shows no significant harm in early childhood, although no benefit. further research is needed on the long-term benefits and risks for the woman and baby. individual patient data meta-analysis may clarify how to maximise benefit and minimise harm.
there a only few studies on the prevention of nutritional rickets in term born children. until new data become available, it appears sound to offer preventive measures (vitamin d or calcium) to groups of high risk, like infants and toddlers; children living in africa, asia or the middle east or migrated children from these regions into areas where rickets is not frequent. due to a marked clinical heterogeneity and the scarcity of data, the main and adverse effects of preventive measures against nutritional rickets should be investigated in different countries, different age groups and in children of different ethnic origin.
there is insufficient evidence to support the efficacy of antiviral agents as adjuvant therapy in the management of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis in children or adults. the included randomised controlled trial showed no advantage of intralesional cidofovir over placebo at 12 months. the study was limited by a small sample size and a change in the cidofovir concentration midway through the trial, from 0.3 mg/ml in children and 0.75 mg/ml in adults, to 5 mg/ml in both adults and children. an adequately powered randomised controlled trial of intra-lesional cidofovir, consistently using higher concentrations of cidofovir in comparison with injected placebo, would be required to determine effectiveness convincingly. future studies must include health-related quality of life and symptom-based outcome measures.
acupuncture and hypnosis may be beneficial for the management of pain during labour; however, the number of women studied has been small. few other complementary therapies have been subjected to proper scientific study.
progestogen-releasing intrauterine systems appear to reduce menstrual blood loss in premenopausal women with uterine fibroids. oral progestogens did not reduce fibroid size or fibroid- related symptoms. however, there was a methodological limitation and the one included study with data had a small sample size. this evidence is insufficient to support the use of progestogens or progestogen-releasing intrauterine systems in treating premenopausal women with uterine fibroids.
no differences in mortality, infection recurrence, clinical cure, super-infection post–therapy, and safety outcomes were reported when continuous infusions of intravenous antibiotics were compared with traditional intermittent infusions of antibiotics. however, the wide confidence intervals suggest that beneficial or harmful effects cannot be ruled out for all outcomes. therefore, the current evidence is insufficient to recommend the widespread adoption of continuous infusion antibiotics in the place of intermittent infusions of antibiotics. additinal large prospective randomised trials, with consistent and complete reporting of clinical outcome measures, conducted with concurrent pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies in special populations, are required to determine whether adoption of continuous antibiotic infusions is warranted in specific circumstances.
we found no clear evidence that cisapride reduces symptoms of gor. due to reports of fatal cardiac arrhythmias or sudden death, from july 2000 in the usa and europe cisapride was restricted to a limited access programme supervised by a paediatric gastrologist.
only one study each for propranolol and flunarizine were identified showing efficacy of these drugs as prophylactics of paediatric migraine. nimodipine, timolol, papaverine, pizotifen, trazodone, l-5htp, clonidine, metoclopramide, and domperidone showed no efficacy in reduction of frequency of attacks. available studies on other commonly used drugs failed to meet our inclusion criteria. the quality of evidence available for the use of drug prophylaxis in paediatric migraine was poor. studies were generally small, with no planning of sample size, so that for many drugs, despite the negative findings of this review, we do not have conclusive evidence of 'no effect'. there is a clear and urgent need for methodologically sound rcts for the use of prophylactic drugs in paediatric migraine, starting with propranolol. these studies need to be adequately powered to investigate meaningful reductions in pain and suffering from a patient's perspective.
it is not possible to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of benzopyrones in the management of lymphoedema from the current available trials.
current research does not provide supporting evidence for a reduction in access to hospital services or a reduction in hospital readmission rate for children with acute and chronic illnesses using specialist home-based nursing services; however, the only summary finding across a few studies was that there is a significant decrease in length of hospitalisation. the preliminary results show no adverse impact on physical health outcomes and a number of papers reported improved satisfaction with home-based care. further trials are required, measuring health, satisfaction, service utilisation and long-term costs.
there is not enough high quality evidence to show that dietary magnesium supplementation during pregnancy is beneficial. [note: the 15 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
sgia can be performed quicker as compared to double layer gia. sgia is comparable to dgia in terms of anastomotic leak, peri-operative complications, mortality and hospital stay. sgia may routinely be used for gia following bowel resection. however, since this conclusion is derived from smaller number of patients recruited in relatively moderate quality trials, further trials should be aimed to reduce the limitations of this review.
three or more doses of sp may have some advantages over the standard two doses in hiv-positive pregnant women, but larger trials would be necessary to confirm an effect on patient important outcomes. however, since sp cannot be administered concurrently with co-trimoxazole - a drug often recommended for infection prophylaxis in hiv-positive pregnant women, new drugs and research is needed to address needs of hiv-positive pregnant women.
we found no evidence that lymphadenectomy decreases the risk of death or disease recurrence compared with no lymphadenectomy in women with presumed stage i disease. the evidence on serious adverse events suggests that women who receive lymphadenectomy are more likely to experience surgically related systemic morbidity or lymphoedema/lymphocyst formation.
there is limited and, in general, low quality evidence for the benefit of the reviewed interventions. people who have had cts surgery should be informed about the limited evidence of the effectiveness of postoperative rehabilitation interventions. until the results of more high quality trials that assess the effectiveness and safety of various rehabilitation treatments have been reported, the decision to provide rehabilitation following cts surgery should be based on the clinician's expertise, the patient's preferences and the context of the rehabilitation environment. it is important for researchers to identify patients who respond to a certain treatment and those who do not, and to undertake high quality studies that evaluate the severity of iatrogenic symptoms from the surgery, measure function and return-to-work rates, and control for confounding variables.
based on the included trials, we found no evidence that antiangiogenic steroids prevent visual loss in patients with neovascular amd. with the emergence of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor modalities, based on evidence summarized in this review, it is unclear what role steroids have in treating patients with neovascular amd.
drugs are effective in the treatment of dysthymia with no differences between and within drug classes. tricyclic antidepressants are more likely to cause adverse events and dropouts. as dysthymia is a chronic condition, there remains little information on quality of life and medium or long-term outcome.
outreach nursing programmes for copd improved disease-specific hrql. however the effect on hospitalisations was heterogeneous, reducing admissions in one study, but increasing them in others, therefore we could not draw firm conclusions for this outcome.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the use of symphysis-fundal height measurements during antenatal care.
due to poor methodological quality, high levels of heterogeneity and publication bias, the current evidence is not sufficiently rigorous to support or refute acupuncture for treating insomnia. larger high-quality clinical trials are required.
probiotics were better than placebo in reducing the number of participants experiencing episodes of acute urtis, the rate ratio of episodes of acute urti and reducing antibiotic use. this indicates that probiotics may be more beneficial than placebo for preventing acute urtis. however, the results have some limitations and there were no data for older people.
due to the poor quality of studies identified, we were unable to draw any conclusions about the effectiveness of rider training on crash, injury, or offence rates. the findings suggest that mandatory pre-licence training may be an impediment to completing a motorcycle licensing process, possibly indirectly reducing crashes through a reduction in exposure. it is not clear if training (or what type) reduces the risk of crashes, injuries or offences in motorcyclists, and a best rider training practice can therefore not be recommended. as some type of rider training is likely to be necessary to teach motorcyclists to ride a motorcycle safely, rigorous research is needed.
prophylactic indomethacin has short-term benefits for preterm infants including a reduction in the incidence of symptomatic pda, pda surgical ligation, and severe intraventricular haemorrhage. however, there is no evidence of effect on mortality or neurodevelopment.
interventions for problem drinking appear to reduce injuries and their antecedents (e.g. falls, motor vehicle crashes, suicide attempts). because injuries account for much of the morbidity and mortality from problem drinking, larger studies are warranted to evaluate the effect of treating problem drinking on injuries.
the limited trial evidence that is available to date does not support the use of selenium supplements in the primary prevention of cvd.
caffeine appears to have similar short-term effects on apnea/bradycardia as does theophylline although caffeine has certain therapeutic advantages over theophylline. theophylline is associated with higher rates of toxicity. the possibility that higher doses of caffeine might be more effective in extremely preterm infants needs further evaluation in randomized clinical trials.
there is currently an absence of evidence to support any of the therapies currently utilised for management of intrinsic tracheomalacia. it remains inconclusive whether the use of nebulised rhdnase in children with airway malacia and a respiratory tract infection worsens recovery. it is unlikely that any rct on surgically based management will ever be available for children with severe life-threatening illness associated with tracheomalacia. for those with less severe disease, rcts on interventions such as antibiotics and chest physiotherapy are clearly needed. outcomes of these rcts should include measurements of the trachea and physiological outcomes in addition to clinical outcomes.
at present, there is a lack of evidence concerning the effects of triiodothyronine supplementation in infants undergoing cardiac surgery. further randomised controlled trials which include sufficiently large subject numbers in a variety of different age strata (neonates, infants and older children) need to be undertaken.
based on currently available randomised trial-derived evidence, there are no data to support or to refute valproate as a sole agent for schizophrenia. there is some evidence for positive effects on aggression and tardive dyskinesia, but given that these results were based on only a single small study they cannot be considered robust. given the paucity of the available database further large, simple well-designed and reported trials are necessary. ideally these would focus on people with schizophrenia and aggression, on those with treatment resistant forms of the disorder and on those with schizoaffective disorders.
as monotherapy or as an adjunct to other antiparkinsonian drugs, anticholinergics are more effective than placebo in improving motor function in parkinson´s disease. neuropsychiatric and cognitive adverse events occur more frequently on anticholinergics than on placebo and are a more common reason for withdrawal than lack of efficacy.results regarding a potentially better effect of the anticholinergic drug on tremor than on other outcome measures are conflicting and data do not strongly support a differential clinical effect on individual parkinsonian features.data is insufficient to allow comparisons in efficacy or tolerability between individual anticholinergic drugs.
daclizumab is well tolerated in combination with interferon beta treated multiple sclerosis population. comparing with placebo, high-dose daclizumab can significantly decreased the number of new or enlarged gadolinium contrast-enhancing lesions. however, the evidence of recommendation is insufficient. more well-designed rcts or crossover controlled trials are required to evaluate the efficacy and safety of daclizumab.
there is evidence that physiotherapy intervention, using a mix of components from different approaches, is significantly more effective than no treatment or placebo control in the recovery of functional independence following stroke. there is insufficient evidence to conclude that any one physiotherapy approach is more effective in promoting recovery of lower limb function or postural control following stroke than any other approach. we recommend that future research should concentrate on investigating the effectiveness of clearly described individual techniques and task-specific treatments, regardless of their historical or philosophical origin.
the review suggests that reducing or removing user fees increases the utilisation of certain healthcare services. however, emerging evidence suggests that such a change may have unintended consequences on utilisation of preventive services and service quality. the review also found that introducing or increasing fees can have a negative impact on health services utilisation, although some evidence suggests that when implemented with quality improvements these interventions could be beneficial. most of the included studies suffered from important methodological weaknesses. more rigorous research is needed to inform debates on the desirability and effects of user fees.
there is a lack of evidence from randomised controlled trials to inform the choices for conservative management following closed reduction of traumatic anterior dislocation of the shoulder. sufficiently powered, good quality, well reported randomised controlled trials with long-term surveillance of conservative management are required. in particular, trials examining the type and duration of immobilisation would be useful.
the findings of this review do not provide sufficient evidence to support or resist a policy of altering the lengths of primary care physicians' consultations. further trials are needed that focus on health outcomes and cost effectiveness.
there is a paucity of high-quality evidence regarding the effect of different dressings on the healing of superficial and partial thickness burn injuries. the studies summarised in this review evaluated a variety of interventions, comparators and clinical endpoints and all were at risk of bias. it is impossible to draw firm and confident conclusions about the effectiveness of specific dressings, however silver sulphadiazine was consistently associated with poorer healing outcomes than biosynthetic, silicon-coated and silver dressings whilst hydrogel-treated burns had better healing outcomes than those treated with usual care.
longer periods of treatment (at least up to 6 months) result in higher success rates in patients with active tb, but the differences are small. under field conditions, where adherence to treatment is a big problem, and shorter regimens might improve adherence, these differences may not be evident. a comparison of <6 months vs. 6 months of treatment under programme conditions would be needed to determine this.
the evidence available at present is limited because only one small randomised clinical trial was identified. although the result is favourable for the implantation of aus in the group with severe incontinence, this result should be considered with caution due to the small sample size and uncertain methodological quality of the study found.
there is insufficient evidence in the current literature to make reasonable conclusions about the efficacy of short course antibiotics in the management of adults and children with bronchiectasis. until further evidence is available, adherence to current treatment guidelines is recommended.
although immediate use of azt halved disease progression during the first year, this effect was not sustained, and there was no improvement in survival in the short or long term.
adding radiotherapy to chemotherapy improves tumour control and overall survival in patients with early stage hodgkin lymphoma.
we could not conclude that the immune responses elicited by the combined vaccine were different from or equivalent to the separate vaccines. there was significantly less immunological response for hib and tetanus and more local reactions in the combined injections. however, these differences rely mostly on one study each. studies did not use an intention-to-treat (itt) analysis and we were uncertain about the risk of bias in many of the studies. these results are therefore inconclusive. studies addressing clinical end points whenever possible, using correct methodology and a large enough sample size should be conducted.
immediate post-partum insertion of iuds appeared safe and effective, though direct comparisons with other insertion times were limited. expulsion rates appear to be higher than with interval insertion. advantages of immediate post-partum insertion include high motivation, assurance that the woman is not pregnant, and convenience. the popularity of immediate post-partum iud insertion in countries as diverse as china, mexico, and egypt support the feasibility of this approach. early follow up may be important in identifying spontaneous iud expulsions.
the place of mechanical devices in the management of urinary incontinence remains in question. currently there is little evidence from controlled trials on which to judge whether their use is better than no treatment and large well-conducted trials are required for clarification. there was also insufficient evidence in favour of one device over another and little evidence to compare mechanical devices with other forms of treatment.
there are no data to support routine administration of furosemide in preterm infants with rds. elective administration of furosemide to any patient with rds should be carefully weighed against the risk of precipitating hypovolemia or developing a symptomatic patent ductus arteriosus. there are not enough data to support routine administration of low-dose theophylline in preterm infants with rds.
high quality evidence from rcts shows that short- and medium-term creatine treatment increases muscle strength in muscular dystrophies. there is also evidence that creatine improves functional performance in muscular dystrophy and idiopathic inflammatory myopathy. creatine is well tolerated in these people. high quality but limited evidence from rcts does not show significant improvement in muscle strength in metabolic myopathies. high-dose creatine treatment impaired activities of daily living and increased muscle pain in mcardle disease.
there is strong evidence that medical male circumcision reduces the acquisition of hiv by heterosexual men by between 38% and 66% over 24 months. incidence of adverse events is very low, indicating that male circumcision, when conducted under these conditions, is a safe procedure. inclusion of male circumcision into current hiv prevention measures guidelines is warranted, with further research required to assess the feasibility, desirability, and cost-effectiveness of implementing the procedure within local contexts.
although the early trials of prophylactic surfactant administration to infants judged to be at risk of developing rds compared with selective use of surfactant in infants with established rds demonstrated a decreased risk of air leak and mortality, recent large trials that reflect current practice (including greater utilization of maternal steroids and routine post delivery stabilization on cpap) do not support these differences and demonstrate less risk of chronic lung disease or death when using early stabilization on cpap with selective surfactant administration to infants requiring intubation.
treating patients to lower than standard bp targets, ≤140-160/90-100 mmhg, does not reduce mortality or morbidity. because guidelines are recommending even lower targets for diabetes mellitus and chronic renal disease, we are currently conducting systematic reviews in those groups of patients.
intermittent vascular occlusion seems safe in liver resection. however, it does not seem to decrease morbidity. more randomised trials seem to be needed.
therapy-based rehabilitation services targeted towards stroke patients living at home appear to improve independence in personal activities of daily living. however, the evidence is derived from a review of heterogeneous interventions and therefore further exploration of the interventions is justifiable.
praziquantel and metrifonate are effective treatments for urinary schistosomiasis and have few adverse events. metrifonate requires multiple administrations and is therefore operationally less convenient in community-based control programmes. evidence on the artemisinin derivatives is currently inconclusive, and further research is warranted on combination therapies. we suggest metrifonate be reconsidered for the who model list of essential medicines.
for children at risk, antibiotics given once or twice daily will reduce the probability of aom while the child is on treatment. in similar populations, antibiotics will reduce the number of episodes of aom per year from around three to around 1.5. we believe that larger absolute benefits are likely in high-risk children. these conclusions were not affected by sensitivity analyses.
preterm infants treated with ethamsylate showed no reductions in mortality or neurodevelopmental impairment despite the reduction in any grade of intraventricular haemorrhage seen in infants < 35 weeks gestation.
the review included two relatively small studies that did not have sufficient statistical power to detect meaningful differences between groups. future large and adequately powered randomised controlled trials are required to measure differences between groups for relevant pre-specified outcomes. special attention should be given to the assessment of maternal satisfaction with care and cost analysis as they will have social and economic implications in both developed and developing countries.
due to the extremely limited number of trials, there is insufficient evidence to draw any conclusions about the effectiveness of non-pharmacological interventions for preventing cvi in standing workers. further large-scale studies examining all possible non-pharmacological interventions and outcomes are required.
although ffn is commonly used in labor and delivery units to help in the management of women with symptoms of preterm labor, currently there is not sufficient evidence to recommend its use. since this review found an association between knowledge of ffn results and a lower incidence of preterm birth before 37 weeks, further research should be encouraged.
there is insufficient, high quality evidence to determine whether or not compression stockings are effective as the sole and initial treatment of varicose veins in people without healed or active venous ulceration, or whether any type of stocking is superior to any other type. future research should consist of a large rct of participants with trunk varices either wearing or not wearing compression stockings to assess the efficacy of this intervention. if compression stockings are found to be beneficial, further studies assessing which length and pressure is the most efficacious could then take place.
available evidence offers weak support to the contention that antidepressants are effective for patients with depression and dementia. however, only four studies are included in the meta-analysis relating to efficacy, and sample sizes are small. moreover, only two included studies investigated the properties of the more commonly used ssris and no studies investigated the properties of newer classes of antidepressants (e.g. selective noradrenergic reuptake inhibitors). this review draws attention to the paucity of research and evidence in this area.
there is no randomised trial-based evidence that lithium on its own is an effective treatment for people with schizophrenia. the evidence available on augmentation of antipsychotics with lithium is inconclusive, but does justify further, large, simple and well-designed trials. these should concentrate on two target groups: 1) people with no affective symptoms, so that trialists can determine whether lithium has an effect on the core symptoms of schizophrenia, 2) people with schizoaffective disorders for whom lithium is widely used in clinical practice, although there is no evidence to support this use.
implications for practice the results of the available studies involving mixed groups of acute, sub-acute and chronic patients with lbp with and without sciatica were quite consistent, indicating that continuous or intermittent traction as a single treatment for lbp is not likely effective for this group. traction for patients with sciatica cannot be judged effective at present either, due to inconsistent results and methodological problems in most studies. we conclude that traction as a single treatment for lbp is probably not effective. implications for research any future research on traction for patients with lbp should distinguish between symptom pattern and duration, and should be carried out according to the highest methodological standards.
acamprosate appears to be an effective and safe treatment strategy for supporting continuous abstinence after detoxification in alcohol dependent patients. even though the sizes of treatment effects appear to be rather moderate in their magnitude, they should be valued against the background of the relapsing nature of alcoholism and the limited therapeutic options currently available for its treatment.
the seven identified studies in adults did not show any significant difference in safety between formoterol and budesonide in comparison with salmeterol and fluticasone. asthma-related serious adverse events were rare, and there were no reported asthma-related deaths. there was a single, small study comparing formoterol and beclomethasone to salmeterol and fluticasone in adults, a single study comparing formoterol and mometasone with salmeterol and fluticasone in adults, and a single study comparing formoterol and fluticasone with salmeterol and fluticasone in adults. no studies were found in children, so no conclusion can be drawn for this age group. overall there is insufficient evidence to decide whether regular formoterol in combination with budesonide, beclometasone, fluticasone or mometasone have equivalent or different safety profiles from salmeterol in combination with fluticasone.
the evidence of effectiveness of physostigmine for the symptomatic treatment of alzheimer's disease is limited. even in a controlled release formulation designed to overcome the short half-life, physostigmine showed no convincing benefit and adverse effects remained common leading to a high rate of withdrawal.
optimal prt improves lr, oa mortality, but no increase in sphincter sparing procedure. crt further increases local control. if the objective is to increase the incidence of sphincter sparing surgery, endocavitary boost showed the most promise. strategies with the potential to improve outcomes, especially oas and spincter sparing while reducing acute and late toxicities (rectal and sexual function) are needed to guide future strategy designs.
children fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for kawasaki disease should be treated with ivig (2 gm/kg single dose) within 10 days of onset of symptoms.
there appears to be conflicting evidence regarding the clinical effectiveness of antioxidant supplementation in cf. based on the evidence, antioxidants appear to decrease quality of life and oxidative stress; however, few trials contributed data towards analysis. further trials examining clinically important outcomes and elucidation of a clear biological pathway of oxidative stress in cf are necessary before a firm conclusion regarding effects of antioxidants supplementation can be drawn.
limited conclusions can be drawn about the effectiveness of drug treatment programmes for drug-using offenders in the courts or the community. this is partly due to the broad range of studies and the heterogeneity of the different outcome measures presented. therapeutic communities with aftercare show promising results for the reduction of drug use and criminal activity in drug using offenders. standardisation of outcome measures and costing methodology would help improve the quality of research conducted in the area.
echinacea preparations tested in clinical trials differ greatly. there is some evidence that preparations based on the aerial parts of e. purpurea might be effective for the early treatment of colds in adults but the results are not fully consistent. beneficial effects of other echinacea preparations, and echinacea used for preventative purposes might exist but have not been shown in independently replicated, rigorous rcts.
there remains insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about the role of drug therapy in the treatment of delirium in terminally ill patients. thus, practitioners should continue to follow current clinical guidelines. further research is essential.
once daily treatment with lmwh is as effective and safe as twice daily treatment with lmwh. however, the 95% confidence interval implies that there is a possibility that the risk of recurrent vte might be higher when people are treated once daily. hence, the decision to treat a person with a once daily regimen will depend on the evaluated balance between increased convenience and the potential for a lower efficacy.
treatment with thalidomide was not shown to be effective and was associated with significantly higher mortality than placebo. there is no reliable evidence on which to base treatment for toxic epidermal necrolysis, a disease commonly associated with mortality rates of around 30%. more research is required to understand the mechanisms of toxic epidermal necrolysis. international multi-centre studies are needed in the form of randomised controlled trials, to evaluate treatments for toxic epidermal necrolysis, especially those using high doses of steroid and intravenous immunoglobulins.
most women should be offered midwife-led models of care and women should be encouraged to ask for this option although caution should be exercised in applying this advice to women with substantial medical or obstetric complications.
there is some evidence that in the short-term, ps reduce symptoms of depression. whilst this reduction is statistically significant, the clinical significance is less clear. larger high quality trials with longer follow-up and evaluation of tolerance and dependence are needed to test the robustness of these findings and, furthermore, to explore which ps may be more beneficial and in which clinical situations they are optimal.
current evidence shows that the addition of antigp treatment, namely glycopeptides, prior to documentation of a gram-positive infection does not improve outcomes.
well-designed randomised controlled trials which compare the efficacy of different therapeutic splinting programmes following mcp arthroplasty are required. at this time, the results of one study (silver level evidence) suggest that continuous passive motion alone is not recommended for increasing motion or strength after mcp arthroplasty.
no overall significant reduction in mortality with vitamin a therapy for children with measles was found. however two doses reduced overall and pneumonia-specific mortality in children aged less than two years. no trials directly compared a single dose with two doses.
the lack of reliable evidence for the effectiveness of any specific interventions for the management of oral submucous fibrosis is illustrated by the paucity, and poor methodological quality, of trials retrieved for this review.
none of the interventions seemed to decrease peri-operative morbidity or offer any long-term survival benefit. haemodilution shows promise in the reduction of blood transfusion requirements in liver resection surgery. however, there is a high risk of type i (erroneously concluding that an intervention is beneficial when it is actually not beneficial) and type ii errors (erroneously concluding that an intervention is not beneficial when it is actually beneficial) because of the few trials included, the small sample size in each trial, and the high risk of bias in the trials. further randomised clinical trials with low risk of bias and random errors that assess clinically important outcomes such as peri-operative mortality are necessary to assess any cardiopulmonary interventions aimed at decreasing blood loss and blood transfusion requirements in patients undergoing liver resections. trials need to be designed to assess the effect of a combination of different interventions in liver resections.
based on the findings of one study involving 51 participants, which was at moderate risk of bias, there is no evidence to support the use of surgery over observation for people with abdominal trauma.
from the available evidence, huperzine a seems to have some beneficial effects on improvement of general cognitive function, global clinical status, behavioral disturbance and functional performance, with no obvious serious adverse events for patients with ad. however, only one study was of adequate quality and size. there is therefore inadequate evidence to make any recommendation about its use. rigorous design, randomized, multi-centre, large-sample trials of huperzine a for ad are needed to further assess the effects.
our update review suggests there is no evidence of benefit from is in reducing pulmonary complications and in decreasing the negative effects on pulmonary function in patients undergoing cabg. in view of the modest number of patients studied, methodological shortcomings and poor reporting of the included trials, these results should still be interpreted cautiously. an appropriately powered trial of high methodological rigour is needed to determine if there are patients who may derive benefit from is following cabg.
implications for practice this review found one randomized trial that showed that weight loss may be beneficial for improving asthma control in overweight and obese patients, in conjunction with weight loss in intervention groups in the short term. applying the grade system to the results of this review however, shows that the quality of evidence is low, because although all four studies are rcts there were serious methodological limitations in the studies (unclear risk of selection bias and high risk of detection bias) and imprecision (small sample size). there is inadequate evidence to comment on the effect of weight loss interventions on quality of life and health care utilization. in addition, there was inadequate reporting of data on adverse effects to permit proper balancing of harms and benefits of the interventions. on account of this low quality of evidence, the benefit of weight loss as an intervention for asthma control remains uncertain, and as such, clinicians should be prepared to help patients to make a decision that is consistent with their own values. implications for research the finding that most of the included studies were of low methodological quality highlights the need for further well designed rcts, with emphasis on adequate methods of allocation sequence generation as well as allocation concealment and longer follow-up periods. these studies need to report more fully on relevant outcomes (both statistically significant and otherwise) such as: asthma symptoms/control, use of rescue medication, change in lung function parameters (actual mean/median values), hospital utilization, quality of life, and adverse effects. there is also a need for longer intervention as well as follow-up durations to evaluate the effect of sustained measures to achieve weight loss, and to determine if these effects are still significantly present after a considerable period of time. there is also a need for these well designed studies in children and adolescents, as well as in low-income countries such as africa, where the prepackaged, low energy diets, as well as structured physical activity-based interventions utilized in these included studies, may not be feasible or applicable.
no eligible trials were identified that compared alternative routes of catheter insertion. the data from eight trials comparing different antibiotic policies were sparse, particularly when intermittent catheterisation was considered separately from indwelling catheterisation. possible benefits of antibiotic prophylaxis must be balanced against possible adverse effects, such as development of antibiotic resistant bacteria. these cannot be reliably estimated from currently available trials.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend the addition of probiotics to infant feeds for prevention of allergic disease or food hypersensitivity. although there was a reduction in clinical eczema in infants, this effect was not consistent between studies and caution is advised in view of methodological concerns regarding included studies. further studies are required to determine whether the findings are reproducible.
although perphenazine has been randomised for more than 40 years, incomplete reporting and the variety of comparators used make it impossible to draw clear conclusions. at best we can say that perphenazine showed similar effects and adverse events as several of the other pooled antipsychotic drugs. since perphenazine is a relatively inexpensive and frequently used compound, further trials are justified to clarify the properties of this classical antipsychotic drug.
on the evidence presently available, it appears reasonable to use inhaled nitric oxide in an initial concentration of 20 ppm for term and near term infants with hypoxic respiratory failure who do not have a diaphragmatic hernia.
silver level evidence was found for one study in favour of mineral baths compared to drug treatment at eight weeks. insufficient evidence was found for all other comparisons. however the scientific evidence is insufficient because of poor methodological quality. therefore, the noted "positive findings" should be viewed with caution. because of the methodological flaws, an answer about the apparent effectiveness of balneotherapy cannot be provided at this moment.
the more conservative estimates from the present analysis found that differences between antidepressants and active placebos were small. this suggests that unblinding effects may inflate the efficacy of antidepressants in trials using inert placebos. further research into unblinding is warranted.
altered fractionation radiotherapy improves survival in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. comparison of the different types of altered radiotherapy suggests that hyperfractionation provides the greatest benefit. an update of this ipd meta-analysis (march 2), which will increase the power of this analysis and allow for other comparisons, is currently in progress.
visibility aids have the potential to increase visibility and enable drivers to detect pedestrians and cyclists earlier. biomotion markings, which highlight the movement and form of the pedestrian, showed evidence of improving pedestrians' conspicuity at night. public acceptability of various effective strategies which improve visibility would merit further development. however, the effect of visibility aids on pedestrian and cyclist safety remains unknown. a cluster randomised controlled trial involving large communities may provide an answer to this question. it would, however, be a challenging trial to conduct. studies that collect data of road traffic injuries relating to the use of visibility aids also warrant consideration.
we have not found any evidence to suggest that this treatment is either beneficial or not. we would advise that practitioners evaluate on a case-by-case basis whether or not to employ this therapy. we recommend that future studies make more use of health-related quality of life and exercise tolerance measures; and that there is an agreement upon a single standard measure of classifying the clinical status of the participants.
continuous cardiotocography during labour is associated with a reduction in neonatal seizures, but no significant differences in cerebral palsy, infant mortality or other standard measures of neonatal well-being. however, continuous cardiotocography was associated with an increase in caesarean sections and instrumental vaginal births. the challenge is how best to convey these results to women to enable them to make an informed choice without compromising the normality of labour.
labour assessment programs, which aim to delay hospital admission until active labour, may benefit women with term pregnancies.
we found insufficient evidence to support or refute the efficacy of occupational therapy interventions for improving, restoring or maintaining independence in adl for stroke survivors residing in care homes. the effectiveness of occupational therapy for the population of stroke survivors residing in care homes remains unclear, and further research in this area is warranted.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to determine whether infusion of base or fluid bolus reduces morbidity and mortality in preterm infants with metabolic acidosis. further large randomised trials are needed.
screening is likely to increase identification rates but rates of referral to support agencies are low and as yet we know little about the proportions of false measurement (negatives or positives). screening does not appear to cause harm, but only one study examined this outcome. as there is an absence of evidence of long-term benefit for women, there is insufficient evidence to justify universal screening in healthcare settings. studies comparing screening versus case finding (with or without advocacy or therapeutic interventions) for women's long-term wellbeing would better inform future policies in healthcare settings.
there was very little evidence about using cox inhibitors for preventing preterm labour. there are inadequate data to make any recommendation about using cox inhibitor in practice to prevent preterm labour. future research should include follow-up of the babies to examine the short-term and long-term effects of cox inhibitors.
existing trials show little evidence for a specific effect of silver acetate in promoting smoking cessation. the confidence intervals for the ratio are quite wide. however, the upper limit of the confidence intervals for a positive effect equates to an absolute increase in the smoking cessation rate of about 4%. any effect of this agent is therefore likely to be smaller than nicotine replacement therapy. the lack of effect of silver acetate may reflect poor compliance with a treatment whose rationale is to create an unpleasant stimulus.
a limited number of studies were available to address this topic, and, of the two randomized trials identified, both were in abstract form only. observational studies also were limited in number and were of lesser quality. although the quality of the evidence varied from the randomized trials, ranging from very low to moderate, there appeared to be substantial benefits for key outcomes (e.g. mortality, aids-defining illness and mortality as a composite endpoint, and unnecessary switches) favoring both immunologic and clinical monitoring or virologic, immunologic, and clinical monitoring versus clinical monitoring alone. very low-quality evidence from observational studies suggested that virologic, immunologic, and clinical monitoring led to more frequent switching, earlier switching, and switching at higher cd4 counts compared with immunologic and clinical monitoring. further information on the studies currently reported in abstract form will provide insight. ongoing studies addressing this topic likely will provide information to further clarify optimal monitoring strategies for guiding when to switch first-line therapy. additionally, studies looking at different virologic monitoring frequencies and/or virologic monitoring at different times after art initiation (e.g. after 2-3 years) would be informative. finally, cost-analysis studies will lend further insights into the applicability of these findings to low-resource settings.
the short- and long-term effectiveness of opioids, nmda receptor antagonists, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, calcitonins, and anaesthetics for clinically relevant outcomes that include pain, function, mood, sleep, quality of life, satisfaction and adverse effects remains unclear. morphine, gabapentin and ketamine demonstrate trends towards short-term analgesic efficacy. memantine and amitriptyline were ineffective for plp. results, however, are to be interpreted with caution as these were based mostly on a small number of studies with limited sample sizes that varied considerably and also lacked long-term efficacy and safety outcomes. the direction of efficacy of calcitonin, anaesthetics and dextromethorphan need further clarification. larger and more rigorous randomised controlled trials are needed to make stronger recommendations about which medications would be useful for clinical practice.
there is increasing evidence suggesting that oa improves subjective sleepiness and sleep disordered breathing compared with a control. cpap appears to be more effective in improving sleep disordered breathing than oa. the difference in symptomatic response between these two treatments is not significant, although it is not possible to exclude an effect in favour of either therapy. until there is more definitive evidence on the effectiveness of oa in relation to cpap, with regard to symptoms and long-term complications, it would appear to be appropriate to recommend oa therapy to patients with mild symptomatic osah, and those patients who are unwilling or unable to tolerate cpap therapy. future research should recruit patients with more severe symptoms of sleepiness, to establish whether the response to therapy differs between subgroups in terms of quality of life, symptoms and persistence with usage. long-term data on cardiovascular health are required.
observational studies do not indicate an overall association between oc use and fracture risk. some reported increased risk for specific user subgroups. dmpa users may have an increased fracture risk. one study indicated hormonal iud use may be associated with decreased risk. observational studies need adjusted analysis because the comparison groups usually differ. researchers should be clear about the variables examined in multivariate analysis.
most clinical outcomes show no difference between strategies. delay slightly reduces patient satisfaction compared to immediate antibiotics (87% versus 92%) but not compared to none (87% versus 83%). in patients with respiratory infections where clinicians feel it is safe not to prescribe antibiotics immediately, no antibiotics with advice to return if symptoms do not resolve is likely to result in the least antibiotic use, while maintaining similar patient satisfaction and clinical outcomes to delayed antibiotics.
while niprisan® appeared to be safe and effective in reducing severe painful crises over a six-month follow-up period, further trials are required to assess its role in the management of people with scd and the results of its multicentre trials are awaited. currently no conclusions can be made regarding the efficacy of ciklavit®. based on the published results for niprisan® and in view of the limitations in data collection and analysis of both trials, phytomedicines may have a potential beneficial effect in reducing painful crises in scd. this needs to be further validated in future trials. more trials are required on the safety and efficacy of phytomedicines used in managing scd.
results of this cochrane review are similar to existing reviews that have examined the health benefits of exercise in this population. although studies included in this review are small and used various measures of physical and mental health, results indicated that regular exercise programmes are possible in this population, and that they can have healthful effects on both the physical and mental health and well-being of individuals with schizophrenia. larger randomised studies are required before any definitive conclusions can be drawn.
currently, hrt or ert for cognitive improvement or maintenance is not indicated for women with ad.
the included studies do not provide reliable evidence that educational interventions are effective in preventing eye injuries. there is a need for well-conducted rcts with adequate allocation concealment and masking (blinding). studies should have a longer follow-up time and more studies need to be conducted in low and middle-income countries.
though there is some evidence to support its use, the precise role and methods of percutaneous pinning are not established. the higher rates of complications with kapandji pinning and biodegradable materials casts some doubt on their general use.
whilst this review found no statistically significant effect on ssi rates of hair removal insufficient numbers of people have been involved in this research to allow confidence in a conclusion. when it is necessary to remove hair, the existing evidence suggests that clippers are associated with fewer ssis than razors. there was no significant difference in ssi rates between depilatory creams and shaving, or between shaving or clipping the day before surgery or on the day of surgery however studies were small and more research is needed.
based on the evidence currently available from randomised controlled trials, a recommendation cannot be given for the use of room air ionisers to reduce symptoms in patients with chronic asthma.
there is insufficient evidence from currently available rcts to recommend fish oil therapy to improve renal function, rejection rates, patient survival or graft survival. the improvements in hdl cholesterol and diastolic blood pressure were too modest to recommend routine use. to determine a benefit in clinical outcomes, future rcts will need to be adequately powered with these outcomes in mind.
rivastigmine appears to be beneficial for people with mild to moderate alzheimer's disease. in comparisons with placebo, improvements were seen in the rate of decline of cognitive function, activities of daily living, and severity of dementia with daily doses of 6 to 12 mg. adverse events were consistent with the cholinergic actions of the drug. a transdermal patch has been tested in one trial, and there is evidence that the lower dose smaller patch is associated with fewer side effects than the capsules or the higher dose larger patch and has comparable efficacy to both. this review has not examined economic data.
some statistically significant differences favouring escitalopram over other antidepressive agents for the acute phase treatment of major depression were found, in terms of efficacy (citalopram and fluoxetine) and acceptability (duloxetine). there is insufficient evidence to detect a difference between escitalopram and other antidepressants in early response to treatment (after two weeks of treatment). cost-effectiveness information is also needed in the field of antidepressant trials. furthermore, as with most standard systematic reviews, the findings rely on evidence from direct comparisons. the potential for overestimation of treatment effect due to sponsorship bias should also be borne in mind.
there is no evidence to support the use of adjuvant progestagen therapy in the primary treatment of endometrial cancer.
prescription of an antigen avoidance diet to a high-risk woman during pregnancy is unlikely to reduce substantially her child's risk of atopic diseases, and such a diet may adversely affect maternal or fetal nutrition, or both. prescription of an antigen avoidance diet to a high-risk woman during lactation may reduce her child's risk of developing atopic eczema, but better trials are needed. dietary antigen avoidance by lactating mothers of infants with atopic eczema may reduce the severity of the eczema, but larger trials are needed.
this review does not support the use of prophylactic thyroid hormones in preterm infants to reduce neonatal mortality, neonatal morbidity or improve neurodevelopmental outcomes. an adequately powered clinical trial of thyroid hormone supplementation with the goal of preventing the postnatal nadir of thyroid hormone levels seen in very preterm infants is required.
massage and touch may serve as alternatives or complements to other therapies for the management of behavioural, emotional and perhaps other conditions associated with dementia. more research is needed, however, to provide definitive evidence about the benefits of these interventions.
reductions in all-cause mortality, major vascular events and revascularisations were found with no excess of adverse events among people without evidence of cvd treated with statins.
it appears, from the limited number of studies performed, that inactivated vaccine reduces exacerbations in copd patients. the size of effect was similar to that seen in large observational studies, and was due to a reduction in exacerbations occurring three or more weeks after vaccination, and due to influenza. there is a mild increase in transient local adverse effects with vaccination, but no evidence of an increase in early exacerbations.
this systematic review of randomised trials provides insufficient evidence to support systemic treatment in women with loco-regional recurrence of breast cancer. participation in randomised trials of systemic treatment versus observation is appropriate.
there is some evidence of a beneficial effect of intermittent pneumatic compression units, but the study was too small and of too short a duration to draw strong conclusions. further research is needed in order to assess whether intermittent pneumatic compression units give long term reduction and relief of the symptoms caused by post-thrombotic syndrome, and prevent deterioration and leg ulceration. the use of elastic compression stockings to treat post-thrombotic syndrome cannot be supported on the basis of the currently available data.
minocycline is an effective treatment for moderate to moderately-severe inflammatory acne vulgaris, but there is still no evidence that it is superior to other commonly-used therapies. this review found no reliable evidence to justify the reinstatement of its first-line use, even though the price-differential is less than it was 10 years ago. concerns remain about its safety compared to other tetracyclines.
from the available evidence no recommendations can be made about whether tyrosine supplementation should be introduced into routine clinical practice. further randomised controlled studies are required to provide more evidence.
anxiety appears to be reduced by playing music during colposcopy. although information leaflets did not reduce anxiety levels, they did increase knowledge levels and are therefore useful in obtaining clinical consent to the colposcopic procedure. leaflets also contributed to improved patient quality of life by reducing psychosexual dysfunction.
there is insufficient evidence of the effect of wbv training on functional performance of neurodegenerative disease patients. also, there is insufficient evidence regarding its beneficial effects on signs and symptoms of the disease, body balance, gait, muscle strength and quality of life compared to other active physical therapy or passive interventions in parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis. more studies assessing other functional tests and accurately assessing safety are needed before a definitive recommendation is established.
aripiprazole may be effective for the treatment of schizophrenia, but it does not differ greatly from typical and atypical antipsychotics with respect to treatment response, efficacy or tolerability. in comparison with typical antipsychotics, aripiprazole may have a lower risk of akathisia, and in comparison to atypical antipsychotics, less risk of raised prolactin and prolongation of the qtc interval. clearly reported pragmatic short, medium and long term randomised controlled trials should be undertaken to determine its position in everyday clinical practice.
we are unable to determine the benefits and harms of different methods of cystic duct occlusion because of the small sample size, short period of follow-up, and lack of reporting of important outcomes in the included trials. adequately powered randomised trials with low risk of bias and with long periods of follow-up and assessing all of the important outcomes for patients and professionals are necessary.
although well-conducted and reported randomised trials are still needed to fully inform practice (no trial data exists reporting hospital and services outcomes, satisfaction with care and economics) pipotiazine palmitate is a viable choice for both clinician and recipient of care.
music listening may have a beneficial effect on heart rate, respiratory rate, and anxiety in mechanically ventilated patients. however, the quality of the evidence is not strong. most studies examined the effects of listening to pre-recorded music. more research is needed on the effects of music offered by a trained music therapist.
overall, corticosteroids did not change mortality in severe sepsis and septic shock. a long course of low dose corticosteroids reduced 28-day mortality without inducing major complications; metabolic disorders were increased.
the current level of evidence for the effectiveness of vitamin d supplementation in the management of people with ms is based on a single rct with potential high risk of bias, which does not at present allow confident decision-making about the use of vitamin d in ms. therefore, until further high quality evidence is available, clinicians may wish to consider relevant ms guidelines on vitamin d supplementation when making decisions about the care of people with multiple sclerosis. adequately powered, multi-centred rcts with a focus on clinical as well as immunological and mri outcomes that are meaningful to people with ms, and are able to provide insight into the benefits of vitamin d in people with ms, are still required.
this systematic review shows that there is not sufficient evidence to support or refute the use of antibiotic prophylaxis to reduce surgical site infection and global infections in patients with low risk of anaesthetic complications, co-morbidities, conversion to open surgery, and infectious complications, and undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. larger randomised clinical trials with intention-to-treat analysis and patients also at high risk of conversion to open surgery are needed.
in a population of stable asthmatics short acting beta-agonists, mast cell stabilisers, or anticholinergics will provide a significant protective effect against exercise-induced bronchoconstriction with few adverse effects. on average, sabas resulted in more effective attenuation than mast cell stabilisers, while mast cell stabilisers were more effective than anti-cholinergic agents. combining saba and mast cell stabilisers may be appropriate in selected cases. the variability in the individual degree of response to these drugs in multi arm trials suggests clinicians and patients work together to identify the most effective prophylactic therapy.
according to high-quality evidence, enhanced glucose control significantly prevents the development of clinical neuropathy and reduces nerve conduction and vibration threshold abnormalities in type 1 diabetes mellitus. in type 2 diabetes mellitus, enhanced glucose control reduces the incidence of clinical neuropathy, although this was not formally statistically significant (p = 0.06). however, enhanced glucose control does significantly reduce nerve conduction and vibration threshold abnormalities. importantly, enhanced glucose control significantly increases the risk of severe hypoglycemic episodes, which needs to be taken into account when evaluating its risk/benefit ratio.
currently, there is little evidence to conclude which type of treatment approach is most effective in preventing relapse or recurrence of depressive episodes in children and adolescents. limited trials found that antidepressant medication reduces the chance of relapse-recurrence in the future, however, there is considerable diversity in the design of trials, making it difficult to compare outcomes across studies. some of the research involving psychological therapies is encouraging, however at present more trials with larger sample sizes need to be conducted in order to explore this treatment approach further.
there is insufficient evidence to advise for or against the use of drug and alcohol testing of occupational drivers for preventing injuries as a sole, effective, long-term solution in the context of workplace culture, peer interaction and other local factors. cluster-randomised trials are needed to better address the effects of interventions for injury prevention in this occupational setting.
treatment with an antipsychotic alone is not a good option. starting with an antidepressant alone and adding an antipsychotic if the patient does not respond or starting with the combination of an antidepressant and an antipsychotic both appear appropriate options for patients with psychotic depression. in clinical practice the balance between risks and benefits suggests that initial antidepressive monotherapy and adding an antipsychotic if there is inadequate response should be the preferred treatment strategy for many patients. the general lack of available data limits confidence in the conclusions drawn.
this systematic review revealed the scarcity of published evidence to support the use of local anesthetic sympathetic blockade as the 'gold standard' treatment for crps. the two randomized studies that met inclusion criteria had very small sample sizes, therefore, no conclusion concerning the effectiveness of this procedure could be drawn. there is a need to conduct randomized controlled trials to address the value of sympathetic blockade with local anesthetic for the treatment of crps.
we are very uncertain of the effect on live birth, ohss and miscarriage of using low-dose hcg to replace fsh during the late follicular phase of coh in women undergoing art, compared to the use of conventional coh. the current evidence suggests that this intervention does not reduce the chance of ongoing and clinical pregnancy; and that it is likely to result in an equivalent number of oocytes retrieved expending less fsh. more studies are needed to strengthen the evidence regarding the effect of this intervention on important reproductive outcomes.
subclavian and internal jugular cva routes have similar risks for catheter-related complications in long-term catheterization in cancer patients. subclavian cva is preferable to femoral cva in short-term catheterization because of lower risks of catheter colonization and thrombotic complications. in short-term haemodialysis catheterization, femoral and internal jugular cva routes have similar risks for catheter-related complications except internal jugular cva routes are associated with higher risks of mechanical complications.
the data are too few to say if vitamin e supplementation either alone or in combination with other supplements is beneficial during pregnancy. [note: the 24 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there appears to be no evidence to support the use of low placed umbilical artery catheters. high catheters should be used exclusively.
the number of patients included in the trials was too small to draw definitive conclusions. the 1-stage approach might be preferable in partially edentulous patients since it avoids one surgical intervention and shortens treatment times, while a 2-stage submerged approach could be indicated when an implant has not obtained an optimal primary stability or when barriers are used for guided tissue regeneration, or when it is expected that removable temporary prostheses could transmit excessive forces on the penetrating abutments especially in fully edentulous patients.
we found some, albeit very limited, indications that in certain cases mobile phone messaging interventions may provide benefit in supporting the self-management of long-term illnesses. however, there are significant information gaps regarding the long-term effects, acceptability, costs, and risks of such interventions. given the enthusiasm with which so-called mhealth interventions are currently being implemented, further research into these issues is needed.
quetiapine is effective for the treatment of schizophrenia, but it is not much different from first-generation antipsychotics and risperidone with respect to treatment withdrawal and efficacy. in comparison to first-generation antipsychotics and risperidone, quetiapine has a lower risk of movement disorders but higher risks of dizziness, dry mouth and sleepiness. more clearly reported pragmatic randomised controlled trials should be carried out to determine its position in everyday clinical practice. studies of medium and long-term effects, including cost-effectiveness, quality of life, social functioning and service utilisation, in comparison with the effects of typical and atypical antipsychotics should be priority areas.
there are insufficient data from randomized controlled trials to guide clinical practice. a large randomized controlled trial is needed in asymptomatic term infants born to mothers with risk factors for infection in their babies, which compares the effect of prophylactic versus selective antibiotics on morbidity, mortality and costs.
reminder packing may represent a simple method for improving adherence for patients with selected conditions. further research is warranted to improve the design and targeting of these devices.
the effectiveness of corticosteroids for induction of labour is uncertain. this method of induction of labour is not commonly used and so further research in this area is probably unwarranted. [note: the seven citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
long-term antibiotics appear to reduce the risk of repeat symptomatic uti in susceptible children but the benefit is small and must be considered together with the increased risk of microbial resistance.
at this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with amd. physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgment until controlled trials are conducted and their findings published. it would be valuable for future research to investigate prospective rcts comparing cataract surgery to no surgery in patients with amd to better evaluate whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in this group. however ethical considerations need to be addressed when delaying a potentially beneficial treatment and it may not be feasible to conduct a long-term study where surgery is withheld from the control group. utilization of pre-existing, standardized systems for grading cataract and amd and measuring outcomes (visual acuity, change in visual acuity, worsening of amd and quality of life measures) should be encouraged.
systemic corticosteroids produce some improvements for children admitted to hospital with acute asthma. the benefits may include earlier discharge and fewer relapses. inhaled or nebulised corticosteroids cannot be recommended as equivalent to systemic steroids at this time. further studies examining differing doses and routes of administration for corticosteroids will clarify the optimal therapy.
there is no clear evidence that surveillance colonoscopy prolongs survival in patients with extensive colitis. there is evidence that cancers tend to be detected at an earlier stage in patients who are undergoing surveillance, and these patients have a correspondingly better prognosis, but lead-time bias could contribute substantially to this apparent benefit. there is indirect evidence that surveillance is likely to be effective at reducing the risk of death from ibd-associated colorectal cancer and indirect evidence that it may be acceptably cost-effective.
the combination of nevirapine, 3tc and d4t is as efficacious as a combination of efavirenz, 3tc and d4t. once-daily nvp with twice-daily 3tc and d4t is as efficacious as twice-daily nvp, 3tc and d4t. however, toxicity may be increased in the once-daily nvp regime. additional trials of sufficient duration are required to provide better evidence for the use of this combination as a first line therapy. ideally, trials should use standardised assessment measures especially with respect to measuring viral load, so that results can be compared and combined in meta-analyses.
automated closed loop systems may result in reduced duration of weaning, ventilation, and icu stay. reductions are more likely to occur in mixed or medical icu populations. due to the lack of, or limited, evidence on automated systems other than smartcare/ps™ and adaptive support ventilation no conclusions can be drawn regarding their influence on these outcomes. due to substantial heterogeneity in trials there is a need for an adequately powered, high quality, multi-centre randomized controlled trial in adults that excludes 'simple to wean' patients. there is a pressing need for further technological development and research in the paediatric population.
this review does not provide enough evidence to influence practice. in particular, no trials compared fetal movement counting with no fetal movement counting. robust research is needed in this area. [note: the four citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the available evidence suggests that the reduction of exposure to multiple allergens compared to usual care reduces the likelihood of a current diagnosis of asthma in children (at ages < 5 years and 5 years and older). mono-intervention studies have not produced effects which are statistically significant compared with control. in children who are at risk of developing childhood asthma, multifaceted interventions, characterised by dietary allergen reduction and environmental remediation, reduce the odds of a physician diagnosis of asthma later in childhood by half. this translates to a number needed to treat (nnt) of 17. the effect of multi-faceted interventions on parent reported wheeze was inconsistent and had no significant impact on nocturnal coughing or dyspnoea. data from monofaceted intervention exposed children studies were not significantly different from those of control groups for all outcomes. there remains uncertainty as to whether multiple interventions are more effective than mono-component interventions. the comparisons made were indirect, making the conclusions drawn uncertain. to our knowledge there are no ongoing studies in which both intervention strategies are randomly compared. the findings, however, warrant further direct comparison between multiple- and monofaceted interventions aimed at reducing the prevalence of asthma in children.
the limitations of this review is the small number of trials and heterogeneity of the studies included. with the current evidence it is not possible to demonstrate which is the best instrument in laparoscopic colectomy. hopefully more data would follow and subsequent updates of this review could become more informative.
these trials demonstrated a significantly reduced risk of stroke in participants receiving regular blood transfusions. data from a follow-up trial indicate individuals may revert to former risk status if transfusion is discontinued. degree of risk must be balanced against the burden of chronic transfusions. further research is required examining the use of transfusion in preventing secondary stroke, and further defining risk factors for stroke, to avoid unnecessarily starting children on blood transfusions.
the use of a cervical stitch should not be offered to women at low or medium risk of mid trimester loss, regardless of cervical length by ultrasound. the role of cervical cerclage for women who have short cervix on ultrasound remains uncertain as the numbers of randomised women are too few to draw firm conclusions. there is no information available as to the effect of cervical cerclage or its alternatives on the family unit and long term outcome. [note: the 23 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the limited evidence indicated that receiving prophylactic antibiotics reduced the rate of bacteriuria and other signs of infection, such as pyuria, febrile morbidity and gram-negative isolates in patients' urine, in surgical patients who undergo bladder drainage for at least 24 hours postoperatively. there was also limited evidence that prophylactic antibiotics reduced bacteriuria in non-surgical patients.
we performed meta-analyses where there was sufficient similarity among the trials and where common outcomes had been measured. there is no evidence from the analysis to suggest that admission avoidance hospital at home leads to outcomes that differ from inpatient hospital care.
cyclosporine statistically significantly increases blood pressure compared to placebo in a dose-related fashion. the magnitude of increase in blood pressure is clinically significant and increases the risk of stroke, myocardial infarction, heart failure and other adverse cardiovascular events associated with elevated bp. consequently prescribers should try to find the lowest effective dose in all patients receiving cyclosporine chronically.
the included studies were too small to determine to what extent strengthening exercises for people with als are beneficial, or whether exercise is harmful. there is a complete lack of randomised or quasi-randomised clinical trials examining aerobic exercise in this population. more research is needed.
currently there is insufficient evidence to suggest that inspiratory muscle training provides any clinical benefit to patients with asthma. due to the limited availability of studies in this area there is a need for further trials evaluating the efficacy of inspiratory muscle training devices in patients with asthma. these studies should investigate asthmatics with a range of severity. they should investigate clinically relevant outcomes such as lung function, symptoms, exacerbation rate and concomitant medications.
flushing of the catheter with a vanco/heparin lock solution leads to a positive overall effect. depending on the baseline tcvc infection rate it is justified to flush the catheter with a combination of an antibiotic and heparin, if the catheter related infection-rate is high.
chemotherapeutic treatment prolongs survival in comparison with placebo in patients with advanced sclc. nevertheless, the impact of first-line chemotherapy on quality of life and in patients with poor prognosis is unknown. well-designed, controlled trials are needed to further evaluate the risks and benefits of different chemotherapeutic schedules in patients with advanced sclc.
the trials did not show that progesterone is an effective treatment for pms nor that it is not. neither trial distinguished a subgroup of women who benefited, nor examined claimed success with high doses.
the evidence base around zotepine is insufficient to provide firm conclusions on its absolute or relative effects. this is despite it being in use in austria, france, germany, japan and the uk.
a lack of quality information precludes us from drawing definite conclusions or recommendations on the use of antidepressants in acute an. future studies testing safer and more tolerable antidepressants in larger, well designed trials are needed to provide guidance for clinical practice.
the results suggest a positive effect of human growth hormone on weight gain and energy absorption. however, in the majority of trials, the effects are short-lived returning to baseline shortly after cessation of therapy. the temporary benefit calls into question the clinical utility of this treatment. to date, the evidence is inconclusive to recommend this therapy. consideration should be made to studying patients during the active phase of intestinal adaptation rather than in the setting of chronic intestinal failure. the role of hgh in paediatric short bowel syndrome remains unknown.
the review shows no clinically important difference between third generation cephalosporins (ceftriaxone or cefotaxime) and conventional antibiotics (ampicillin-chloramphenicol combination, or chloramphenicol alone). therefore the choice of antibiotic will depend on cost and availability. the antimicrobial resistance pattern against various antibiotics needs to be closely monitored in low- to middle-income countries as well as high-income countries.
the review does not support an effect of fermented milk on blood pressure. despite the positive effect on sbp the authors conclude, for several reasons, that fermented milk has no effect on blood pressure. the effect found was very modest and only on sbp, the included studies were very heterogeneous and several with weak methodology. finally, sensitivity and subgroup analyses could not reproduce the antihypertensive effect. the results do not give notion to the use of fermented milk as treatment for hypertension or as a lifestyle intervention for pre-hypertension nor would it influence population blood pressure.
since only one small study is currently available, there is insufficient evidence to draw any conclusions about the efficacy or safety of valerian compared with placebo or diazepam for anxiety disorders. rcts involving larger samples and comparing valerian with placebo or other interventions used to treat of anxiety disorders, such as antidepressants, are needed.
involving consumer-providers in mental health teams results in psychosocial, mental health symptom and service use outcomes for clients that were no better or worse than those achieved by professionals employed in similar roles, particularly for case management services. there is low quality evidence that involving consumer-providers in mental health teams results in a small reduction in clients' use of crisis or emergency services. the nature of the consumer-providers' involvement differs compared to professionals, as do the resources required to support their involvement. the overall quality of the evidence is moderate to low. there is no evidence of harm associated with involving consumer-providers in mental health teams. future randomised controlled trials of consumer-providers in mental health services should minimise bias through the use of adequate randomisation and concealment of allocation, blinding of outcome assessment where possible, the comprehensive reporting of outcome data, and the avoidance of contamination between treatment groups. researchers should adhere to spirit and consort reporting standards for clinical trials. future trials should further evaluate standardised measures of clients' mental health, adverse outcomes for clients, the potential benefits and harms to the consumer-providers themselves (including need to return to treatment), and the financial costs of the intervention. they should utilise consistent, validated measurement tools and include a clear description of the consumer-provider role (eg specific tasks, responsibilities and expected deliverables of the role) and relevant training for the role so that it can be readily implemented. the weight of evidence being strongly based in the united states, future research should be located in diverse settings including in low- and middle-income countries.
implications for practice: nippv may be a useful method of augmenting the beneficial effects of ncpap in preterm infants with apnea that is frequent or severe. its use appears to reduce the frequency of apneas more effectively than ncpap. additional safety and efficacy data are required before recommending nippv as standard therapy for apnea. implications for research: future trials with sufficient power should assess the efficacy (reduction in failure of therapy) and safety (gi complications) of nippv. outcomes should be assessed throughout the entire period during which the infant requires assisted ventilation. the recent ability to synchronise nippv with an infant's spontaneous respirations is a promising development requiring further assessment.
there is low quality evidence from two small trials that psychostimulants do not significantly improve the maintenance of wakefulness test in myotonic dystrophy. there is low quality evidence from four studies that modafinil significantly improves the epworth sleepiness scale. more randomized trials are needed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of psychostimulants.
this review was updated in 2012. the results of the original review published in 2010 remain unchanged. there is still not enough evidence to support the use of anti-tnf-α drugs in the management of women with endometriosis for the relief of pelvic pain.
there is limited evidence for pain improvement with the use of the ocp (both low and medium dose oestrogen) in women with dysmenorrhoea. there is no evidence of a difference between different ocp preparations.
existing evidence is limited and dated. any possible benefit of adjunctive beta-blocker therapy is obscured by poor reporting within the studies. important data on quality of life, satisfaction, healthy days, and cost are not available. considering the number of people whose symptoms are only partially responsive to antipsychotic medication, well conducted and reported trials in this area could be justified.
this cochrane review has found a lack of evidence on the effects of carvedilol for treating heart failure in patients with chagas disease. the two included trials were underpowered and had a high risk of bias. there are no conclusive data to support the use of carvedilol for treating chagas cardiomyopathy. unless randomized clinical trials provide evidence of a treatment effect, and the trade off between potential benefits and harms is established, policy-makers, clinicians, and academics should be cautious when recommending and administering carvedilol for treating heart failure in patients with chagas disease. the efficacy and safety of other pharmacological interventions for treating heart failure in patients with chagas disease is unknown.
there was adequate efficacy evidence for lithium or antidepressants preventing relapse in unipolar affective disorder, however their relative efficacy was unknown. when considering lithium or antidepressant long-term therapy, patients and clinicians should take into account the patient's clinical history, the side-effects and the individual's likely adherence to the recommended treatment regime. large-scale, long-term randomised trials in unselected groups of subjects with unipolar affective disorder are needed.
the evidence clearly supports the superiority of parenteral artesunate over quinine for the treatment of severe malaria in both adults and children and in different regions of the world.
smt is no more effective in participants with acute low-back pain than inert interventions, sham smt, or when added to another intervention. smt also appears to be no better than other recommended therapies. our evaluation is limited by the small number of studies per comparison, outcome, and time interval. therefore, future research is likely to have an important impact on these estimates. the decision to refer patients for smt should be based upon costs, preferences of the patients and providers, and relative safety of smt compared to other treatment options. future rcts should examine specific subgroups and include an economic evaluation.
there was no evidence of a statistical difference in pregnancy outcomes when rlh was used. nevertheless, further large rcts should be undertaken in long gnrh agonist down regulation protocols, since all pooled pregnancy estimates, although not statistically different probably due to the small numbers, point towards a beneficial effect of co-treatment with rlh, in particular with respect to pregnancy-loss and poor-responders.
patients who receive electromechanical and robot-assisted arm training after stroke are more likely to improve their generic activities of daily living. paretic arm function may also improve, but not arm muscle strength. however, the results must be interpreted with caution because there were variations between the trials in the duration and amount of training, type of treatment, and in the patient characteristics.
on basis of this review no conclusions can be stated whether or not occupational therapy improves outcomes in ms patients.the lack of (randomized controlled) efficacy studies in most intervention categories of occupational therapy demonstrates an urgent need for future research in occupational therapy for multiple sclerosis. initially, a survey of occupational therapy practice for ms patients, including the characteristics and needs of these patients, is necessary to develop a research agenda for efficacy studies.
understandably amphetamines are rarely formally evaluated in randomised studies and therefore unpublished work in this area is likely to exist. addition of more studies may clarify reasons why people with schizophrenia persist in taking these harmful stimulants.
although root canal irrigants such as sodium hypochlorite and chlorhexidine appear to be effective at reducing bacterial cultures when compared to saline, most of the studies included in this review failed to adequately report these clinically important and potentially patient-relevant outcomes. there is currently insufficient reliable evidence showing the superiority of any one individual irrigant. the strength and reliability of the supporting evidence was variable and clinicians should be aware that changes in bacterial counts or pain in the early postoperative period may not be accurate indicators of long-term success. future trials should report both clinician-relevant and patient-preferred outcomes at clearly defined perioperative, as well as long-term, time points.
we cannot draw any conclusions about the effectiveness and safety of lowering cholesterol in aneurysmal sah because of insufficient reliable evidence from only one small trial. more rcts are needed.
we did not find any trials assessing whether or not vitamin a supplementation in children with measles prevents blindness. however, vitamin a use in children should be encouraged for its proven clinical benefits.
planned management (with methods such as oxytocin or prostaglandin) reduces the risk of some maternal infectious morbidity without increasing caesarean sections and operative vaginal births. fewer infants went to neonatal intensive care under planned management although no differences were seen in neonatal infection rates. since planned and expectant management may not be very different, women need to have appropriate information to make informed choices.
the available trial evidence was not extensive, was very heterogeneous and generally of poor quality, so there was insufficient evidence to be able to identify a strategy of pin site care that minimises infection rates. adequately-powered randomised trials are required to examine the effects of different pin care regimens, and co-interventions - such as antibiotic use - and other extraneous factors must be controlled in the study designs.
this update adds seven more trials to the original review, which contained four trials. at every dose analysed, levetiracetam significantly reduced focal seizure frequency relative to placebo. this indicates that levetiracetam can significantly reduce focal seizure frequency when it is used as an add-on treatment for both adults and children with drug-resistant focal epilepsy. as there was evidence of significant levels of statistical heterogeneity within this positive effect it is difficult to be precise about the relative magnitude of the effect. at a dose of 2000 mg, levetiracetam may be expected to be 3.9 times more effective than placebo; with 30% of adults being responders at this dose. at a dose of 60 mg/kg/day, levetiracetam may be expected to be 0.9 times more effective than placebo; with 25% of children being responders at this dose. when dose was ignored, children were better responders than adults by around 4% to 13%. the results grossly suggest that one child or adult may respond to levetiracetam for every four or five children or adults, respectively, that have received levetiracetam rather than placebo. the drug seems to be well tolerated in both adults and children although non-specific changes in behaviour may be experienced in as high as 20% of children. this aspect of the adverse-effect profile of levetiracetam was analysed crudely and requires further investigation and validation. it seems reasonable to continue the use of levetiracetam in both adults and children with drug-resistant focal epilepsy. the results cannot be used to confirm longer-term or monotherapy effects of levetiracetam or its effects on generalised seizures. the conclusions are largely unchanged from those in the original review. the most significant contribution of this update is the addition of paediatric data into the analysis.
the optimal management of fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia remains unclear. lack of complete data sets for two trials and differences in interventions precluded the pooling of data from these trials which may have enabled a more developed analysis of the trial findings. further trials would be required to determine optimal treatment (the specific medication and its dose and schedule). such studies should include long-term follow up of all children and mothers.
intravesical botulinum toxin appears to be an effective therapy for refractory oab symptoms, but as yet little controlled trial data exist on benefits and safety compared with other interventions, or with placebo. further robust data are required on long term outcomes, safety, and optimal dose of botulinum toxin for oab.
in the management of the motor complications seen in parkinson's disease, cabergoline can be used to reduce levodopa dose and modestly improve motor impairment and disability with an acceptable adverse event profile. these conclusions are based on, at best, medium term evidence.
we found a four-fold increase in the rate of catheter related blood stream infection when a polyurethane dressing was used to secure the central venous catheter however this research was at risk of bias and the confidence intervals were wide indicating high uncertainty around this estimate; so the true effect could be as small as 2% or as high as 17-fold. more, better quality research is needed regarding the relative effects of gauze and tape versus polyurethane dressings for central venous catheter sites.
no technique provided reliable pain control in the 17 included studies. some studies reported that women experienced severe pain (mean scores of 7 to 9 out of 10) during uterine intervention, irrespective of the analgesic technique used. we concluded that the available evidence fails to show whether paracervical block is inferior, equivalent or superior to alternative analgesic techniques, in terms of efficacy and safety, for women undergoing uterine interventions.
no adequate rcts have been performed to determine whether plasma exchange improves the short- or long-term outcome for chronic myasthenia gravis or myasthenia gravis exacerbation. however, many studies with case series report short-term benefit from plasma exchange in myasthenia gravis, especially in myasthenic crisis. in severe exacerbations of myasthenia gravis one rct did not show a significant difference between plasma exchange and intravenous immunoglobulin. further research is need to compare plasma exchange with alternative short-term treatments for myasthenic crisis or before thymectomy and to determine the value of long-term plasma exchange for treating myasthenia gravis.
there is no evidence of significant benefit from any intervention for increasing ankle range of motion in charcot-marie-tooth disease type 1a or duchenne muscular dystrophy. further research is required.
the evidence from randomised controlled trials is currently too limited to draw definitive conclusions about the use of non-surgical interventions for paediatric pes planus. future high quality trials are warranted in this field. only limited interventions commonly used in practice have been studied and there is much debate over the treatment of symptomatic and asymptomatic pes planus
evidence from randomised controlled trials on the benefits of routine vitamin k supplementation for people with cf is currently weak and limited to two small trials of short duration. however, no harm was found and until further evidence is available, the present recommendations should be adhered to.
there is currently insufficient information available from randomised trials to support or refute the routine or selective use of tocolytic agents to facilitate infant birth at the time of caesarean section. [note: the six citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
until better evidence is available, the choice of antihypertensive should depend on the clinician's experience and familiarity with a particular drug, and on what is known about adverse effects. exceptions are diazoxide, ketanserin, nimodipine and magnesium sulphate, which are probably best avoided. [note: the 37 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
manual anal stretch should probably be abandoned in the treatment of chronic anal fissure in adults. for those patients requiring surgery for anal fissure, open and closed partial lateral internal sphincterotomy appear to be equally efficacious. more data are needed to assess the effectiveness of posterior internal sphincterotomy, anterior levatorplasty, wound suture or papilla excision. bilateral internal sphincterotomy shows promise, but needs further research into its efficacy.
there was no evidence from the limited randomised trials reviewed, to justify a policy of withholding oral fluids after uncomplicatedcaesarean section. further research is justified.
alprazolam appears to reduce depressive symptoms more effectively than placebo and as effectively as tricyclic antidepressants. however, the studies included in the review were heterogeneous, of poor quality and only addressed short-term effects, thus limiting our confidence in the findings. whilst the rate of all-cause withdrawals did not appear to differ between alprazolam and placebo, and withdrawals were less frequent in the alprazolam group than in any of the conventional antidepressants combined group, these findings should be interpreted with caution, given the dependency properties of benzodiazepines.
betamimetic therapy appears to be able to reduce the number of fetal heart rate abnormalities and perhaps reduce uterine activity. however, there is not enough evidence based on clinically important outcomes to evaluate the use of betamimetics for suspected fetal distress.
we did not find evidence that thromboprophylaxis reduces mortality or pe in any of the comparisons assessed. however, we found some evidence that thromboprophylaxis prevents dvt. although the strength of the evidence was not high, taking into account existing information from other related conditions such as surgery, we recommend the use of any dvt prophylactic method for people with severe trauma.
these results should be interpreted with caution as the methodological quality of the studies was highly variable. we conclude that there is, so far, no solid base for the decision to either retain or sacrifice the pcl with or without use of a posterior stabilized design during total knee arthroplasty. the technique of pcl retention is difficult because the normal configuration and tension need to be reproduced with ligament tensioners. knowledge of the technique needs to be improved before it can yield superior results compared to the more straightforward techniques of pcl sacrifice or use of a posterior stabilized design. also, studies evaluating the effect of both techniques should address the right outcome parameters such as range of motion, contact position, and anterior-posterior stability. suggestions are given to improve future research on this specific topic of knee arthroplasty.
intravenous doxapram and intravenous methylxanthine appear to be similar in their short term effects for treating apnea in preterm infants, although these trials are too small to exclude an important difference between the two treatments or to exclude the possibility of less common adverse effects. long term outcome of infants treated in these trials has not been reported. further studies would require a large number of infants to clarify whether there might be differences in responses or adverse effects with these two drugs at different ages.
there is insufficient evidence to judge whether acupuncture is effective in treating cancer pain in adults.
this review found limited evidence to support the use of moxibustion for correcting breech presentation. there is some evidence to suggest that the use of moxibustion may reduce the need for oxytocin. when combined with acupuncture, moxibustion may result in fewer births by caesarean section; and when combined with postural management techniques may reduce the number of non-cephalic presentations at birth, however, there is a need for well-designed randomised controlled trials to evaluate moxibustion for breech presentation which report on clinically relevant outcomes as well as the safety of the intervention.
infants with established respiratory distress syndrome who receive animal derived surfactant extract treatment have a decreased risk of pneumothorax, a decreased risk of pulmonary interstitial emphysema, a decreased risk of mortality, and a decreased risk of bronchopulmonary dysplasia or death.
limited evidence from randomised controlled trials shows that intravenous immunoglobulin has a beneficial effect on strength. there was a non-significant trend towards improvement in disability. more research is needed to discover whether intravenous immunoglobulin improves disability and is cost-effective.
in progressive ms, the single included trial reveals a non-significant trend in reduction of sustained edss progression and number of relapses in favour of methotrexate. there are no studies of methotrexate in relapsing remitting ms. before drawing further conclusions regarding the efficacy of methotrexate in ms, further trials of people with relapsing-remitting ms or progressive ms are required.
there are conflicting effects of tens on pain outcomes in patients with ra. al-tens is beneficial for reducing pain intensity and improving muscle power scores over placebo while, conversely, c-tens resulted in no clinical benefit on pain intensity compared with placebo. however c-tens resulted in a clinical benefit on patient assessment of change in disease over al-tens. more well designed studies with a standardized protocol and adequate number of subjects are needed to fully conclude the effect of c-tens and al-tens in the treatment of ra of the hand.
there is accumulating evidence that taking vitamin e or beta-carotene supplements will not prevent or delay the onset of amd. there is no evidence with respect to other antioxidant supplements, such as vitamin c, lutein and zeaxanthin, or any of the commonly marketed multivitamin combinations. although generally regarded as safe, vitamin supplements may have harmful effects and clear evidence of benefit is needed before they can be recommended. people with amd should see the related cochrane review 'antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for slowing the progression of age-related macular degeneration' written by the same review team.
our review found that each of the following were effective at reducing the rate of otorrhoea up to two weeks following surgery: (1) multiple saline washouts at surgery, (2) a single application of topical antibiotic/steroid drops at surgery, (3) a prolonged application of topical drops (namely antibiotic ear drops, antibiotic/steroid eardrops or aminoglycoside/steroid ear drops) and (4) a prolonged application of oral antibacterial agents/steroids. however, the rate of otorrhoea between rcts varied greatly and the higher the rates of otorrhoea within a rct, the smaller the nntb for therapy. we conclude that if a surgeon has a high rate of postoperative otorrhoea in children then either saline irrigation or antibiotic ear drops at the time of surgery would significantly reduce that rate. if topical drops are chosen, it is suggested that to reduce the cost and potential for ototoxic damage this be a single application at the time of surgery and not prolonged thereafter.
whilst there appears to be a small effect in favour of exercise in reducing depression and anxiety scores in the general population of children and adolescents, the small number of studies included and the clinical diversity of participants, interventions and methods of measurement limit the ability to draw conclusions. it makes little difference whether the exercise is of high or low intensity. the effect of exercise for children in treatment for anxiety and depression is unknown as the evidence base is scarce.
with the lack of evidence, the routine use of lrta in treating children with non-specific cough cannot be recommended.
a single trial studying budesonide suggests that it may be effective for the treatment of active lymphocytic colitis. an ongoing placebo-controlled trial may confirm the benefit of budesonide. there is weaker evidence that mesalazine with or without cholestyramine may be effective for the treatment of lymphocytic colitis, but this benefit needs to be confirmed in a placebo-controlled study. no conclusions can be made regarding bismuth subsalicylate. these agents require further study before they can be recommended as treatment options for lymphocytic colitis. further trials studying interventions for lymphocytic colitis are warranted.
led light source phototherapy is efficacious in bringing down levels of serum total bilirubin at rates that are similar to phototherapy with conventional (compact fluorescent lamp (cfl) or halogen) light sources. further studies are warranted for evaluating efficacy of led phototherapy in neonates with haemolytic jaundice or in the presence of severe hyperbilirubinaemia (stb ≥ 20 mg/dl).
there was some evidence that cdp-choline has a positive effect on memory and behaviour in at least the short to medium term. the evidence of benefit from global impression was stronger, but is still limited by the duration of the studies. further research with cdp-choline should focus on longer term studies in subjects who have been diagnosed with currently accepted standardised criteria, especially vascular mild cognitive impairment (vamci) or vascular dementia.
there is high quality evidence that the use of blunt needles appreciably reduces the risk of exposure to blood and bodily fluids for surgeons and their assistants over a range of operations. it is unlikely that future research will change this conclusion.
well-designed, masked, randomised controlled trials using standardised methods are needed to establish the benefits of new and existing prophylactic and treatment regimes for recurrent corneal erosion. international consensus is also needed to progress research efforts towards evaluation of the major effective treatments for recurrent corneal erosions.
five-alpha-reductase inhibitors reduce prostate cancer risk but may increase the risk of high-grade disease in men who are undergoing regular screening for prostate cancer using prostate specific antigen and digital rectal examination. effects are consistent across race, family history and age and possibly 5ari but were limited to men with baseline psa values < 4.0 ng/ml. the impact of 5ari on absolute or relative rates of prostate cancer in men who are not being regularly screened is not clear. information is inadequate to assess the impact of 5ari on mortality.
psychological interventions may be slightly superior to usual care or waiting list control conditions at the end of treatment although the clinical significance of this is debatable. except for a single study, these therapies are not superior to placebo and the sustainability of their effect is questionable. the meta-analysis was significantly limited by issues of validity, heterogeneity, small sample size and outcome definition. future research should adhere to current recommendations for ibs treatment trials and should focus on the long-term effects of treatment.
this update of the review published in 2005 does not contain any new trials published in full. one new trial that has only been published as an abstract, does not show any benefit in overall survival in patients receiving prophylactic cranial irradiation. there is insufficient evidence to support the use of pci in clinical practice. where possible, patients should be offered entry into a clinical trial.
research has shown of high rates of use of complementary and alternative therapies (cam) for children with autism including gluten and/or casein exclusion diets. current evidence for efficacy of these diets is poor. large scale, good quality randomised controlled trials are needed.
no drug treatment for sma type i has been proven to have significant efficacy.
heavy sedation compared to light sedation does not confer additional benefits in terms of less severe withdrawal or increased rates of commencement on naltrexone maintenance treatment. given that the adverse events are potentially life-threatening, the value of antagonist-induced withdrawal under heavy sedation or anaesthesia is not supported. the high cost of anaesthesia-based approaches, both in monetary terms and use of scarce intensive care resources, suggest that this form of treatment should not be pursued.
a high risk of bias within the included studies, heterogeneity and evidence gaps prevent firm conclusions on the effect of slum upgrading strategies on health and socio-economic wellbeing. the most common health and socio-economic outcomes reported were communicable diseases and indicators of financial poverty. there was a limited but consistent body of evidence to suggest that slum upgrading may reduce the incidence of diarrhoeal diseases and water-related expenditure. the information available on slum dwellers’ perspectives provided some insight to barriers and facilitators for successful implementation and maintenance of interventions. the availability and use of reliable, comparable outcome measures to determine the effect of slum upgrading on health, quality of life and socio-economic wellbeing would make a useful contribution to new research in this important area. given the complexity in delivering slum upgrading, evaluations should look to incorporate process and qualitative information alongside quantitative effectiveness data to determine which particular interventions work (or don’t work) and for whom.
etidronate, at 400 mg per day, demonstrated a statistically significant and clinically important benefit in the secondary prevention of vertebral fractures. no statistically significant reductions in vertebral fractures were observed when it was used for primary prevention. in addition, no statistically significant reductions in non-vertebral, hip, or wrist fractures were found, regardless of whether etidronate was used for primary or secondary prevention. the level of evidence for all outcomes is silver (www.cochranemsk.org.)
endarterectomy is of some benefit for 50% to 69% symptomatic stenosis and highly beneficial for 70% to 99% stenosis without near-occlusion. benefit in patients with carotid near-occlusion is marginal in the short-term and uncertain in the long-term. these results are generalisable only to surgically-fit patients operated on by surgeons with low complication rates (less than 7% risk of stroke and death). benefit from endarterectomy depends not only on the degree of carotid stenosis, but also on several other factors, including the delay to surgery after the presenting event.
current research suggests that outpatient vision therapy/orthoptics is more effective than home-based convergence exercises or home-based computer vision therapy/orthoptics for children. in adult population, evidence of the effectiveness of various non-surgical interventions is less consistent.
the data from the present meta-analysis indicate that intravesical bcg treatment is more efficacious than epi in reducing tumour recurrence for ta and t1 bladder cancer. however, bcg appears to be associated with a higher incidence of adverse effects, such as drug-induced cystitis, haematuria and systemic toxicity, than epi. the overall quality of the evidence is rather low. well-designed, high quality randomised controlled trials with good allocation concealment are required.
based on trials meeting the inclusion criteria for this review, there is insufficient evidence to recommend a particular method of tooth replacement for partially edentulous patients.
recompression therapy is standard for the treatment of dci, but there is no randomized controlled trial evidence for its use. both the addition of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (nsaid) and the use of heliox may reduce the number of recompressions required, but neither improve the odds of recovery. the application of either of these strategies may be justified. the modest number of patients studied demands a cautious interpretation. benefits may be largely economic and an economic analysis should be undertaken. there is a case for large randomized trials of high methodological rigour in order to define any benefit from the use of different breathing gases and pressure profiles during recompression therapy.
when used in isolation, current evidence indicates poor diagnostic performance of most physical tests used to identify lumbar disc herniation. however, most findings arise from surgical populations and may not apply to primary care or non-selected populations. better performance may be obtained when tests are combined.
training health professionals to provide smoking cessation interventions had a measurable effect on the point prevalence of smoking, continuous abstinence and professional performance. the one exception was the provision of nicotine gum or replacement therapy, which did not differ between groups.
the results of randomised and non-randomised studies sometimes differed. in some instances non-randomised studies yielded larger estimates of effect and in other instances randomised trials yielded larger estimates of effect. the results of controlled trials with adequate and inadequate/unclear concealment of allocation sometimes differed. when differences occurred, most often trials with inadequate or unclear allocation concealment yielded larger estimates of effects relative to controlled trials with adequate allocation concealment. however, it is not generally possible to predict the magnitude, or even the direction, of possible selection biases and consequent distortions of treatment effects from studies with non-random allocation or controlled trials with inadequate or unclear allocation concealment.
this updated review found no evidence suggesting that apc should be used for treating patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. apc seems to be associated with a higher risk of bleeding. the drug company behind apc, eli lilly, has announced the discontinuation of all ongoing clinical trials using this drug for treating patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. apc should not be used for sepsis or septic shock outside randomized clinical trials.
the evidence from the studies identified in this review is not of sufficient quality or power to obtain a clear answer to the question as to whether target payment remuneration provides a method of improving primary health care. additional efforts should be directed in evaluating changes in physicians' remuneration systems. although it would not be difficult to design a randomised controlled trial to evaluate the impact of such payment systems, it would be difficult politically to conduct such trials.
use of lmwh in outpatients significantly reduces vte when immobilization of the lower leg is required.
this systematic review found high level evidence supporting the use of bont-a as an adjunct to managing the upper limb in children with spastic cp. bont-a should not be used in isolation but should be accompanied by planned occupational therapy. further research is essential to identify children most likely to respond to bont-a injections, monitor longitudinal outcomes, determine timing and effect of repeated injections and the most effective dosage, dilution and volume schedules. the most effective adjunct therapies including frequency and intensity of delivery also requires investigation.
the review found promising evidence supporting the use of chinese herbal medicine for primary dysmenorrhoea; however, results are limited by the poor methodological quality of the included trials.
cct is safe and effective in improving mobility for people after moderate stroke and may reduce inpatient length of stay. further research is required, investigating quality of life, participation and cost-benefits, that compares cct to standard care and that also investigates the differential effects of stroke severity, latency and age.
the current available data may indicate a possible positive intervention effect of pentoxifylline on all-cause mortality and mortality due to hepatorenal syndrome, and conversely, an increase in serious and non-serious adverse events. however, the evidence is not firm; no conclusions can be drawn regarding whether pentoxifylline has a positive, negative, or neutral effect on participants with alcoholic hepatitis.
effectiveness was not significantly different for the methods compared. pregnancy data were available from half of the patch trials but two-thirds of ring trials. the patch could lead to more discontinuation than the coc. the patch group had better compliance than the coc group. compliance data came from half of the patch studies and one-third of the ring trials. patch users had more side effects than the coc group. ring users generally had fewer adverse events than coc users but more vaginal irritation and discharge. the quality of the evidence for this review was considered low for the patch and moderate for the ring. the main reasons for downgrading were lack of information on the randomization sequence generation or allocation concealment, the outcome assessment methods, high losses to follow up, and exclusions after randomization.
the evidence included in this review supports the use of end of life home-care programmes for increasing the number of patients who will die at home, although the numbers of patients being admitted to hospital while receiving end of life care should be monitored. future research should also systematically assess the impact of end of life home care on care givers.
there is no conclusive evidence from randomised controlled trials to support the routine use of inhaled oxygen in patients with acute ami. a definitive randomised controlled trial is urgently required given the mismatch between trial evidence suggestive of possible harm from routine oxygen use and recommendations for its use in clinical practice guidelines.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials to support or refute the use of prophylactic antibiotics when umbilical artery catheters are inserted in newborn infants, and no evidence to support or refute continuing antibiotics once initial cultures rule out infection in newborn infants with umbilical artery catheters.
owing to the small number of patients, the results may not be representative. based on current available evidence, we are unable to support or refute the use of supplemental perioperative steroids for patients with adrenal insufficiency during surgery.
it is not possible to draw any clear conclusions about the effectiveness of antidepressants given immediately postpartum in preventing postnatal depression and, therefore, cannot be recommended for prophylaxis of postnatal depression, due to the lack of clear evidence. larger trials are needed which also include comparisons of antidepressant drugs with other prophylactic treatments to reflect clinical practice, and examine adverse effects for the foetus and infant, as well as assess women's attitudes to the use of antidepressants at this time.
we found insufficient evidence to recommend the use of acupuncture for people with depression. the results are limited by the high risk of bias in the majority of trials meeting inclusion criteria.
there is some evidence that a supportive intervention which encourages people to continue to use their cpap machines leads to greater levels of cpap machine usage than control, although the variation across the studies introduces some uncertainty over how consistent this effect is. we could not find evidence that a short-term educational intervention led to improvements in usage. cognitive behavioural therapy led to the largest increases in average machine usage, partly because more participants were prepared to try out the treatment. studies generally recruited cpap naive patients whose sleep apnoea was severe. trials in patients who have struggled to persist with treatment are required, as there is currently little evidence in this population. this could make a valuable contribution to our understanding of the complex relationship between initial motivation, ongoing perception of benefit and long-term health benefits.
there is low evidence, at the present, supporting the clinical use of antidepressants for the treatment of depressed opioid addicts in treatment with opioid agonists. there is a need of larger randomised studies investigating relevant outcomes, safety issues and reporting data to allow comparison of results.
cbt is effective in reducing the symptoms of fatigue at post-treatment compared with usual care, and may be more effective in reducing fatigue symptoms compared with other psychological therapies. the evidence base at follow-up is limited to a small group of studies with inconsistent findings. there is a lack of evidence on the comparative effectiveness of cbt alone or in combination with other treatments, and further studies are required to inform the development of effective treatment programmes for people with cfs.
the use of scopolamine versus placebo in preventing motion sickness has been shown to be effective. no conclusions can be made on the comparative effectiveness of scopolamine and other agents such as antihistamines and calcium channel antagonists. in addition, we identified no randomised controlled trials that examined the effectiveness of scopolamine in the treatment of established symptoms of motion sickness.
exercise during adjuvant treatment for breast cancer can be regarded as a supportive self-care intervention which results in improved physical fitness and thus the capacity for performing activities of daily life, which may otherwise be impaired due to inactivity during treatment. improvements in fatigue were ambiguous and there was a lack of evidence for improvement with exercise for other treatment-related side effects. since exercise interventions (for sedentary participants) require behaviour change, strategies for behaviour change should underpin these interventions. furthermore, long-term evaluation is required due to possible long-term side effects.
any advantages in intra-operative outcomes of condylocephalic nails are outweighed by the increase in fracture healing complications, reoperation rate, residual pain and limb deformity when compared with an extramedullary implant, particularly a sliding hip screw. the use of condylocephalic nails (in particular ender nails), for trochanteric fracture is no longer appropriate.
evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that psychological support such as counselling is effective post-miscarriage. further trials should be good quality, adequately-powered using standardised interventions and outcome measures at specific time points. the economic implications and women's satisfaction with psychological follow-up should also be explored in any future study.
the review authors do not recommend prophylactic epidural blood patch over other treatments because there are too few trial participants to allow reliable conclusions to be drawn. however, therapeutic epidural blood patch showed a benefit over conservative treatment, based on the limited available evidence.
inhaled corticosteroids used for 4 weeks or more before exercise testing significantly attenuated exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. the relative benefits of inhaled corticosteroids compared to other forms of exercise induced bronchoconstriction treatment (sodium cromoglycate, nedocromil sodium, salbutamol, and other anti-inflammatory agents) remains unclear.
currently available data are insufficient to confidently assess the merits of the two methods of giving intravenous diuretics. based on small and relatively heterogenous studies, this review showed greater diuresis and a better safety profile when loop diuretics were given as continuous infusion. the existing data still does not allow definitive recommendations for clinical practice and larger studies should be done to more adequately settle this issue.
open surgical treatment of acute achilles tendon ruptures significantly reduces the risk of rerupture compared with non-surgical treatment, but produces significantly higher risks of other complications, including wound infection. the latter may be reduced by performing surgery percutaneously.
evidence from rcts suggests that the choice of sclerosant, dose, formulation (foam versus liquid), local pressure dressing, degree and length of compression have no significant effect on the efficacy of sclerotherapy for varicose veins. the evidence supports the current place of sclerotherapy in modern clinical practice, which is usually limited to treatment of recurrent varicose veins following surgery and thread veins. surgery versus sclerotherapy is the subject of a further cochrane review.
the newest evidence from one rct says there is no significant difference between antibiotics versus no antibiotics in the treatment of uncomplicated diverticulitis. previous rcts have only suggested a non-inferiority between different antibiotic regimes and treatment lengths. this new evidence needs confirmation from more rcts before it can be implicated safely in clinical guidelines. ongoing rcts will be published in the years to come and more are needed. the role of antibiotics in the treatment of complicated diverticulitis has not been investigated yet.
recombinant growth hormone therapy is effective in improving the intermediate outcomes in height, weight and lean tissue mass when compared with no treatment. one measure of pulmonary function test showed moderate improvement. no significant changes in quality of life, clinical status or side-effects were observed in this review. long-term, well-designed randomised controlled trials of recombinant growth hormone therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis are required prior to evaluation of human growth hormone treatment for routine use in patients.
limited evidence suggests that vaginal tenofovir microbicides may reduce the risk of acquisition of hiv and hsv-2 infections in women; but other types of topical microbicides have not shown evidence of an effect on hiv or sti acquisition. therefore, there is not enough evidence to recommend topical microbicides for hiv or sti prevention at present. further studies are needed to confirm the beneficial effects of tenofovir microbicide gel in vaginal sex. in addition, further research should continue on the development and testing of new microbicides. if the effectiveness of the tenofovir and/or other microbicides is confirmed in further studies, there will need to be a clear pathway to rapid regulatory approval. successful launch of the effective gel would depend on having in place appropriate mechanisms for distribution to the women who need it, along with a strategy for ensuring that they use it correctly.
there is insufficient evidence showing that routine drainage after colorectal anastomoses prevents anastomotic and other complications.
microwave thermotherapy techniques are effective alternatives to turp and alpha-blockers for treating symptomatic bph in men with no history of urinary retention or previous prostate procedures and prostate volumes between 30 to 100 ml. however, turp provided greater symptom score and urinary flow improvements and reduced the need for subsequent bph treatments compared to tumt. small sample sizes and differences in study design limit comparisons between devices with different designs and energy levels. the effects of symptom duration, patient characteristics, or prostate volume on treatment response are unknown.
insufficient data on the effectiveness and safety of any antidepressants therapies in parkinson's disease are available on which to make recommendations for their use. further large scale randomised controlled trials are urgently required in this area.
stpp shows promise, with modest to moderate, often sustained gains for a variety of patients. however, given the limited data and heterogeneity between studies, these findings should be interpreted with caution. furthermore, variability in treatment delivery and treatment quality may limit the reliability of estimates of effect for stpp. larger studies of higher quality and with specific diagnoses are warranted.
the failure to demonstrate a beneficial effect for oxygen breathing over air breathing in cancer or cardiac failure was limited by the small volume of research studies available for inclusion, the small numbers of participants and by the methods used in the studies.
there is evidence only from individual small and low quality trials with minimal data suggesting that police officers benefit from psychosocial interventions, in terms of physical symptoms and psychological symptoms such as anxiety, depression, sleep problems, cynicism, anger, ptsd, marital problems and distress. no data on adverse effects were available. meta-analyses of the available data were not possible. further well-designed trials of psychosocial interventions are required. research is needed on organization-based interventions to enhance psychological health among police officers.
asthma self-management education programs in children improve a wide range of measures of outcome. self-management education directed to prevention and management of attacks should be incorporated into routine asthma care. conclusions about the relative effectiveness of the various components are limited by the lack of direct comparisons. future trials of asthma education programs should focus on morbidity and functional status outcomes, including quality of life, and involve direct comparisons of the various components of interventions.
the results support a protective effect of supplementation with either folic or folinic acid for patients with rheumatoid arthritis during treatment with mtx. there was a clincally important significant reduction shown in the incidence of gi side effects, hepatic dysfunction (asmeasured by elevated serum transaminase levels) as well as a clincally important significant reduction in discontinuation of mtx treatment for any reason. a trend towards a reduction in stomatitis was demonstrated however this did not reach statistical significance. this updated review with its focus on lower doses of folic acid and folinic acid and updated assessment of risk of bias aimed to give a more precise and more clinically relevant estimate of the benefit of folate supplementation for patients with rheumatoid arthritis receiving methotrexate.
ne is associated with clinically and statistically significant transient reduction of symptoms of croup 30 minutes post-treatment. evidence does not favor racemic epinephrine or le, or ippb over simple nebulization.
currently there are relatively few studies of antidepressants for the treatment of agitation and psychosis in dementia. the ssris sertraline and citalopram were associated with a reduction in symptoms of agitation when compared to placebo in two studies. both ssris and trazodone appear to be tolerated reasonably well when compared to placebo, typical antipsychotics and atypical antipsychotics. future studies involving more subjects are required to determine if ssris, trazodone, or other antidepressants are safe and effective treatments for agitation and psychosis in dementia.
at present, little empirical evidence is available to support the use of editorial peer review as a mechanism to ensure quality of biomedical research. however, the methodological problems in studying peer review are many and complex. at present, the absence of evidence on efficacy and effectiveness cannot be interpreted as evidence of their absence. a large, well-funded programme of research on the effects of editorial peer review should be urgently launched.
there is no evidence from this systematic review and meta-analysis to demonstrate that overgowns are effective in limiting death, infection or bacterial colonisation in infants admitted to newborn nurseries.
there remains insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to determine which methods of conservative treatment are the most appropriate for the more common types of distal radial fractures in adults. therefore, at present, practitioners applying conservative management should use an accepted technique with which they are familiar, and which is cost-effective from the perspective of their provider unit. patient preferences and circumstances, and the risk of complications should also be considered. prioritising research questions to clarify the most appropriate conservative treatment for this common fracture is warranted. researchers should differentiate between extra-articular and intra-articular, and non-displaced and displaced fractures, ascertain patient preferences, and agree a core outcome data set.
we found inconsistent evidence for home-based asthma educational interventions compared to standard care, education delivered outside of the home or a less intensive educational intervention delivered at home. although education remains a key component of managing asthma in children, advocated in numerous guidelines, this review does not contribute further information on the fundamental content and optimum setting for such educational interventions.
there was some evidence that hbot was effective for the termination of acute migraine in an unselected population, and weak evidence that nbot was similarly effective in cluster headache. given the cost and poor availability of hbot, more research should be done on patients unresponsive to standard therapy. nbot is cheap, safe and easy to apply, so will probably continue to be used despite the limited evidence in this review.
there is no enough evidence that long-term corticosteroid treatment delays progression of long term disability in patients with ms. since one study at high risk of bias showed that the administration of pulsed high dose i. v. mp is associated with a significant reduction in the risk of long term disability progression in patients with rr ms, an adequately powered, high quality rct is needed to investigate this finding.
although the incidence of gout flares requiring treatment may be increased in patients taking febuxostat compared to placebo or allopurinol during early treatment, no such increase in gout flares was observed in the long-term follow-up study when compared to allopurinol. febuxostat at any dose was shown to be beneficial in achieving serum uric acid levels < 6.0 mg/dl and reducing serum uric acid levels in the period from baseline to final visit when compared to placebo and to allopurinol. however, the grade of evidence ranged from low to high, which indicates that further research is needed.
when the possible side-effects of standard treatment (hypnotics) are considered, there is an argument to be made for clinical use of alternative treatments in the elderly. exercise, though not appropriate for all in this population, may enhance sleep and contribute to an increased quality of life. research involving exercise programmes designed with the elderly in mind is needed.
there is currently no good evidence that inhaled mgso4 can be used as a substitute for inhaled β2-agonists. when used in addition to inhaled β2-agonists (with or without inhaled ipratropium), there is currently no overall clear evidence of improved pulmonary function or reduced hospital admissions. however, individual study results from three trials suggest possible improved pulmonary function in those with severe asthma exacerbations (fev1 less than 50% predicted). heterogeneity among trials included in this review precludes a more definitive conclusion. further studies should focus on inhaled mgso4 in addition to the current guideline treatment for acute asthma (inhaled β2 -agonist and ipratropium bromide). as the evidence suggests that the most effective role of nebulised mgso4 may be in those with severe acute features and this is where future research should be focused. a set of core outcomes needs to be agreed upon both in adult and paediatric studies to allow improved study comparison in future.
based on the evidence reviewed, it is possible that intensive advocacy for women recruited in domestic violence shelters or refuges reduces physical abuse one to two years after the intervention but we do not know if it has a beneficial effect on their quality of life and mental health. similarly, there is insufficient evidence to show if less intensive interventions in healthcare settings for women who still live with the perpetrators of violence are effective.
there is no evidence that using tap water to cleanse acute wounds in adults or children increases or reduces infection. there is not strong evidence that cleansing wounds per se increases healing or reduces infection. in the absence of potable tap water, boiled and cooled water as well as distilled water can be used as wound cleansing agents.
overall, the literature was of poor quality, and only a small number of trials made useful contributions. though our results provide some evidence to indicate that antidepressants may be beneficial for people with depression and schizophrenia, the results, at best, are likely to overestimate the treatment effect, and, at worst, could merely reflect selective reporting of statistically significant results and publication bias. at present, there is no convincing evidence to support or refute the use of antidepressants in treating depression in people with schizophrenia. we need further well-designed, conducted and reported research to determine the best approach towards treating depression in people with schizophrenia. note: the 71 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
there is insufficient evidence to either support or refute the use of acupuncture (either needle or laser) in the treatment of lateral elbow pain. this review has demonstrated needle acupuncture to be of short term benefit with respect to pain, but this finding is based on the results of 2 small trials, the results of which were not able to be combined in meta-analysis. no benefit lasting more than 24 hours following treatment has been demonstrated. no trial assessed or commented on potential adverse effect. further trials, utilising appropriate methods and adequate sample sizes, are needed before conclusions can be drawn regarding the effect of acupuncture on tennis elbow.
amt is effective in preventing influenza a in children but the nntb is high (nntb: 12 (95% ci 9 to 17). rmt probably helps the abatement of fever on day three of treatment, but the quality of the evidence is poor. due to the small number of available studies, we could not reach a definitive conclusion on the safety of amt or the effectiveness of rmt in preventing influenza in children and the elderly.
preterm infants no longer requiring endotracheal intubation and ippv should be directly extubated without a trial of ett cpap.
evidence from these trials is insufficient to establish whether ics are beneficial in cf, but withdrawal in those already taking them has been shown to be safe. there is some evidence they may cause harm in terms of growth. it has not been established whether long-term use is beneficial in reducing lung inflammation, which should improve survival, but it is unlikely this will be proven conclusively in a randomised controlled trial.
there is insufficient evidence to draw any specific conclusions about the efficacy of antibiotics for this condition in children (although one trial suggests macrolides may be efficacious in some children with lrti secondary to mycoplasma). the use of antibiotics has to be balanced with possible adverse events. there is still a need for high quality, double-blinded rcts to assess the efficacy and safety of antibiotics for lrti secondary to m. pneumoniae in children.
one small study found no significant difference between groups treated with ocp, mefenamic acid, low dose danazol or naproxen. overall, the evidence from the one study is not sufficient to adequately assess the effectiveness of ocp. this review was unable to achieve its stated objectives because of the paucity of the data.
the included studies did not report on all the outcomes that were pre-specified in the protocol for this review. even though more effective than placebo, due to the high risk of bias of the included studies, the small number of studies and the overall small sample size, it is not possible to recommend hydroxyzine as a reliable first-line treatment in gad.
majority of the rcts have not shown beneficial effects of lcpufa supplementation on the neurodevelopmental outcomes of term infants. the beneficial effects on visual acuity have not been consistently demonstrated. routine supplementation of term infant milk formula with lcpufa can not be recommended.
there are no clear findings to support or refute the use of prophylactic manoeuvres to prevent shoulder dystocia, although one study showed an increased rate of caesareans in the prophylactic group. both included studies failed to address important maternal outcomes such as maternal injury, psychological outcomes and satisfaction with birth. due to the low incidence of shoulder dystocia, trials with larger sample sizes investigating the use of such manoeuvres are required.
in people with foot ulcers due to diabetes, hbot significantly improved the ulcers healed in the short term but not the long term and the trials had various flaws in design and/or reporting that means we are not confident in the results. more trials are needed to properly evaluate hbot in people with chronic wounds; these trials must be adequately powered and designed to minimise all kinds of bias.
we found no reliable evidence to support or refute the use of pre-admission antibiotics for suspected cases of non-severe meningococcal disease. evidence of moderate quality from one rct indicated that single intramuscular injections of ceftriaxone and long-acting chloramphenicol were equally effective, safe and economical in reducing serious outcomes. the choice between these antibiotics would be based on affordability, availability and patterns of antibiotic resistance. further rcts comparing different pre-admission antibiotics, accompanied by intensive supportive measures, are ethically justifiable in participants with severe illness, and are needed to provide reliable evidence in different clinical settings.
we did not find sufficient evidence to support or refute the effectiveness of the valsalva manoeuvre for termination of svt. further research is needed and this should include a standardised approach to performance technique and methodology.
acetazolamide and furosemide therapy is neither effective nor safe in treating post-hemorrhagic ventricular dilatation. acetazolamide and furosemide cannot be recommended as therapy for post hemorrhagic hydrocephalus.
emla reduces pain response during circumcision in newborn male infants. other potentially more effective forms of analgesia for circumcision (such as dorsal penile nerve block, ring block) should be subjected to systematic reviews.
there is insufficient evidence from rcts to conclude that any one locomotor training strategy improves walking function more than another for people with sci. the effects especially of robotic-assisted locomotor training are not clear, therefore research in the form of large rcts, particularly for robotic training, is needed. specific questions about which type of locomotor training might be most effective in improving walking function for people with sci need to be explored.
there is moderate quality evidence that mmh advice and training with or without assistive devices does not prevent back pain or back pain-related disability when compared to no intervention or alternative interventions. there is no evidence available from rcts for the effectiveness of mmh advice and training or mmh assistive devices for treating back pain. more high quality studies could further reduce the remaining uncertainty.
at present, there are insufficient data to allow reliable conclusions to be drawn on the effects of electrical stimulation in the management of faecal incontinence. there is a suggestion that electrical stimulation may have a therapeutic effect, but this is not certain. larger, more generalisable trials are needed.
there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the view that perceptual interventions are effective. future studies should be sufficiently large, include a standard care comparison and measure longer term functional outcomes. people with impaired perception problems should continue to receive neurorehabilitation according to clinical guidelines.
current evidence is insufficient to support routine rapid viral testing as a means to reduce antibiotic use in pediatric eds. results suggest that rapid viral testing may be beneficial in terms of reducing rates of antibiotic usage, urine investigations and blood investigations, but are not statistically significant due to lack of power. rapid viral testing does reduce the rate of chest x-rays in the ed. a large trial addressing the effect on antibiotic usage is needed.
eversion cea may be associated with low risk of arterial occlusion and restenosis. however, numbers are too small to definitively assess benefits or harms. reduced restenosis rates did not appear to be associated with clinical benefit in terms of reduced stroke risk, either perioperatively or later. until further evidence is available, the choice of the cea technique should depend on the experience and familiarity of the individual surgeon.
we did not consider any study to be sufficiently informative for contemporary treatment decisions concerning the question single versus tandem asct in view of inherent biases. in addition, none of the trials integrated the so-called "novel agents" which are now considered standard treatment for mm. to improve the quality of future studies, sample size calculations should consider the potentially steep decrease in compliance with the second asct. reporting of results of treatment- or transplantation-related mortality should clearly specify the type and number of events (the numerator) in a well-defined population (the denominator).
at the present time there is insufficient evidence to support the use of one intervention in preference to another.
interventions with retailers can lead to large decreases in the number of outlets selling tobacco to youths. however, few of the communities studied in this review achieved sustained levels of high compliance. this may explain why there is limited evidence for an effect of intervention on youth perception of ease of access to tobacco, and on smoking behaviour.
in current rcts, levothyroxine replacement therapy for subclinical hypothyroidism did not result in improved survival or decreased cardiovascular morbidity. data on health-related quality of life and symptoms did not demonstrate significant differences between intervention groups. some evidence indicates that levothyroxine replacement improves some parameters of lipid profiles and left ventricular function.
the quality of the included trials was inadequate to allow any conclusion about the efficacy of hypnotherapy for irritable bowel syndrome. more research with high quality trials is needed.
there was some evidence that cold-water immersion reduces delayed onset muscle soreness after exercise compared with passive interventions involving rest or no intervention. there was insufficient evidence to conclude on other outcomes or for other comparisons. the majority of trials did not undertake active surveillance of pre-defined adverse events. high quality, well reported research in this area is required.
based on this updated review, there is no evidence from the trials reviewed that early administration (in the first two weeks of life) of inhaled steroids to ventilated preterm neonates was effective in reducing the incidence of cld. currently, use of inhaled steroids in this population cannot be recommended. studies are needed to identify the risk/benefit ratio of different delivery techniques and dosing schedules for the administration of these medications. studies need to address both the short-term and long-term benefits and adverse effects of inhaled steroids with particular attention to neurodevelopmental outcome.
there is moderately strong evidence that duloxetine 60 mg and 120 mg daily are efficacious for treating pain in diabetic peripheral neuropathy and fibromyalgia but 20 mg daily is not. minor side effects are common at therapeutic doses but serious side effects are rare. direct comparisons of duloxetine with other antidepressants and with other drugs already shown to be efficacious in neuropathic pain would be appropriate and should include unbiased economic analyses.
there is evidence from one trial that prophylactic antibiotics reduces the risk of infection after human bites but confirmatory research is required. there is no evidence that the use of prophylactic antibiotics is effective for cat or dog bites. there is evidence that the use of antibiotic prophylactic after bites of the hand reduces infection but confirmatory research is required.
compared to single-agent doxorubicin, the combination chemotherapy regimens evaluated, given in conventional doses, produced only marginal increases in response rates, at the expense of increased toxic effects and with no improvements in overall survival.
although there has been a large amount of research in this area, most studies were excluded due to inherent problems in the nature of their crossover designs. usually data are not reported before the crossover and the nature of td and its likely response to treatments makes it imprudent to use this data. the review provides little usable information for service users or providers and more well designed and reported studies are indicated.
dopamine was more successful than albumin at correcting low bp in hypotensive preterm infants, many of whom had already received volume. neither intervention has been shown to be superior at improving blood flow or in improving mortality and morbidity in preterm infants. the trials do not allow any firm conclusions to be made as to whether or when volume or dopamine should be used in preterm infants.
based on current evidence of the effectiveness of pcvs for the prevention of aom, the currently licensed 7-valent pcv administered during infancy has marginal beneficial effects. discrete reductions of 6% to 7% may mean substantial reductions from a public health perspective. administering pcv7 in older children with a history of aom appears to have no benefit in preventing further episodes.
these small trials suggest varicella vaccine administered within three days to children following household contact with a varicella case reduces infection rates and severity of cases. no rcts for adolescents or adults were identified. however safety was not adequately addressed.
the small sample size of included trials together with their methodological weaknesses severely limit the usefulness of this review for guiding practice. it is impossible to identify or refute clinically important differences between the alternative surgical operations. larger rigorous trials are needed to improve the evidence with which to define optimum surgical treatment for rectal prolapse: the results of one such trial are awaited.
progressive resistive exercise or a combination of progressive resistive exercise and aerobic exercise appear to be safe and may be beneficial for adults living with hiv/aids. these findings are limited by the small number of studies that could be included in meta-analyses, small sample sizes and variable participant withdrawal rates among included studies. future research would benefit from including participants at various stages of hiv infection, a greater proportion of female participants, and participants in a variety of age groups to increase the generalizability of results. furthermore, future research would benefit from studies with larger sample sizes that conduct an "intention-to-treat" analysis (analysis of participants based on the groups to which they were originally allocated) to better understand outcomes of participants that withdraw from exercise interventions.
there is insufficient evidence either to support or to refute the use of cyclofenil in the treatment of raynaud's phenomenon secondary to scleroderma.
whilst it may appear that cholinergic agents and intravesically administered prostaglandin offer most promise in the treatment of post-operative urinary retention, the evidence is weak. there is a need for further research into pharmacological alternatives to catheterisation in the treatment of this common surgical complication.
the very limited data reviewed showed that bisphosphonate therapy andin those with aids wasting syndrome, testosteronemay be safe and possibly effective methods to improve bone mineral density in hiv patients. the available studies are small, of short duration, and not powered to detect changes in who categories and fracture rates. larger studies using bisphosphonates are currently underway. the role of colecalciferol, androgen replacement in women, and growth hormone are also under investigation.
some treatments lead to temporary short-term hair removal. high quality research is needed on the effect of laser and photoepilation.
few treatments for alopecia areata have been well evaluated in randomised trials. we found no rcts on the use of diphencyprone, dinitrochlorobenzene, intralesional corticosteroids or dithranol although they are commonly used for the treatment of alopecia areata. similarly although topical steroids and minoxidil are widely prescribed and appear to be safe, there is no convincing evidence that they are beneficial in the long-term. most trials have been reported poorly and are so small that any important clinical benefits are inconclusive. there is a desperate need for large well conducted studies that evaluate long-term effects of therapies on quality of life. considering the possibility of spontaneous remission especially for those in the early stages of the disease, the options of not being treated therapeutically or, depending on individual preference wearing a wig may be alternative ways of dealing with this condition.
since the last version of this review, new relevant studies have not provided additional information to change the conclusions. published literature on the subject lacks the methodological rigour or robust reporting needed to make confident assessments of the role of tens in chronic pain management. large multi-centre rcts of tens in chronic pain are still needed.
interleukin 10 does not appear to provide any benefit for the treatment of active crohn's disease. this systematic review shows that interleukin 10 does not increase the number of remissions (complete or clinical), but increases the rate of withdrawal due to adverse events relative to placebo. the quality of the evidence regarding the efficacy of il-10 is moderate and although further research may have an impact on point estimates of efficacy further randomized trials are unlikely to be undertaken.
while the use of an antenatal psychosocial assessment may increase the clinician's awareness of psychosocial risk, neither of these small studies provides sufficient evidence that routine antenatal psychosocial assessment by itself leads to improved perinatal mental health outcomes. further studies with better sample size and statistical power are required to further explore this important public health issue. it will also be important to examine outcomes up to one year postpartum not only for mother, but also infant and family.
based on currently available randomised trial-derived evidence, carbamazepine cannot be recommended for routine clinical use for treatment or augmentation of antipsychotic treatment of schizophrenia. at present large, simple well-designed and reported trials are justified especially if focusing on those with violent episodes and people with schizoaffective disorders or those with both schizophrenia and eeg abnormalities.
non-invasive ventilation can reduce the risk of death in the icu, endotracheal intubation, shorten icu stay and length of intubation. some outcomes and complications of non-invasive ventilation were varied according to different participant populations. other than the oxygen therapy, we must mention the importance of standard treatment by physicians. the evidence is weak and we did not include participants with pulmonary tuberculosis and cystic fibrosis. more rcts are required to answer these clinical questions. however, the review indicates that non-invasive ventilation may be more beneficial than standard oxygen supplementation via a venturi mask for pneumonia.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the benefits and risks of maternal oxygen therapy for suspected impaired fetal growth. further trials of maternal hyperoxygenation seem warranted.
the short-term results of laparoscopic repair in ventral hernia are promising. in spite of the risks of adhesiolysis, the technique is safe. nevertheless, long-term follow-up is needed in order to elucidate whether laparoscopic repair of ventral/incisional hernia is efficacious.
this review has been updated in 2011. the results of the original review published in 2009 remain unchanged. there is still not enough evidence to support the use of pentoxifylline in the management of premenopausal women with endometriosis in terms of subfertility and relief of pain outcomes.
there is only limited evidence for the effectiveness of nsaids for short term pain reduction in pfps. the evidence for the effect of glycosaminoglycan polysulphate is conflicting and merits further investigation. the anabolic steroid nandrolone may be effective, but is too controversial for treatment of pfps.
currently, there are insufficient trials of adequate methodological quality on oxcarbazepine in the acute treatment of bipolar disorder to inform us on its efficacy and acceptability. studies predominantly examine the treatment of mania: there are data from subgroup analysis on mixed affective, hypomania and rapid-cycling states. from the few studies included in this review, oxcarbazepine did not differ in efficacy compared to placebo in children and adolescents. it did not differ from other active agents in adults. it may have a poorer tolerability profile compared to placebo. no data were found on outcomes relevant to patients and clinicians, such as length of hospital admission. there is a need for adequately powered randomised controlled trials of good methodological quality to inform us of the therapeutic potential of oxcarbazepine across the spectrum of acute episodes in bipolar disorder.
overall no statistically significant effect of treadmill training with or without body weight support was detected. although individual studies suggested that treadmill training with body weight support may be more effective than treadmill training alone and that treadmill training plus task-oriented exercise may be more effective than sham exercises, further trials are required to confirm these findings.
peripheral retinal ablation reduces the incidence of adverse ophthalmic outcome in premature infants with threshold rop. in sighted eyes, peripheral retinal ablation may reduce the size of the visual field. at this stage, long term outcomes remain unknown.
the available evidence suggests that extra-oral endodontics is not detrimental for teeth replanted after more than 60 minutes dry time. studies with moderate/high risk of bias indicate that soaking in thymosin alpha 1 and gentamycin sulphate followed by hyperbaric oxygen may be advantageous however, they have not previously been reported as interventions for avulsed teeth and need further validation. more evidence with low risk of bias is required and, with the low incidence of avulsed teeth, collaborative multicentre trials are indicated.
no rct reported on clinically relevant outcome measures - all cause mortality, cardiovascular morbidity and morbidity. there were no significant differences in overall adverse events and withdrawals due to adverse events among the evening versus morning dosing regimens. in terms of bp lowering efficacy, for 24-hour sbp and dbp, the data suggests that better blood pressure control was achieved with bedtime dosing than morning administration of antihypertensive medication, the clinical significance of which is not known.
the use of occupational pep is based on limited direct evidence of effect. however, it is highly unlikely that a definitive placebo-controlled trial will ever be conducted, and, therefore, on the basis of results from a single case-control study, a four-week regimen of pep should be initiated as soon as possible after exposure, depending on the risk of seroconversion. there is no direct evidence to support the use of multi-drug antiretroviral regimens following occupational exposure to hiv. however, due to the success of combination therapies in treating hiv-infected individuals, a combination of antiretroviral drugs should be used for pep. healthcare workers should be counseled about expected adverse events and the strategies for managing these. they should also be advised that pep is not 100% effective in preventing hiv seroconversion. a randomized controlled clinical trial is neither ethical nor practical. due to the low risk of hiv seroconversion, a very large sample size would be required to have enough power to show an effect. more rigorous evaluation of adverse events, especially in the developing world, are required. seeing that current practice is partly based on results from individual primary animal studies, we recommend a formal systematic review of all relevant animal studies.
there are a lack of well-designed, controlled experiments of non-invasive modes of respiratory support in children with ahrf. studies assessing outcomes of mortality and avoidance of intubation and its associated complications, hospital stay and patient comfort are needed.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the effect of vinpocetine on survival or dependency in patients with acute ischaemic stroke.
based on limited evidence, we cannot recommend a specific drug for treatment of fatigue in palliative care patients. surprisingly, corticosteroids have not been a research focus for fatigue treatment, although these drugs are frequently used. recent fatigue research seems to focus on modafinil, which may be beneficial although there is no evidence currently. amantadine and methylphenidate should be further examined. consensus regarding fatigue assessment in advanced disease is needed.
limited evidence suggests that carotid patch angioplasty may reduce the risk of perioperative arterial occlusion and restenosis. it would appear to reduce the risk of ipsilateral stroke and there is a non significant trend towards a reduction in perioperative any stroke rate and all-cause case fatality.
the absolute and comparative efficacy and tolerability of pharmacotherapies to treat ataxia in ms are poorly documented and no recommendations can be made to guide prescribing. although studies on neurosurgery and neurorehabilitation showed promising results, the absolute indications for treating with those methods cannot be developed. standardised, well validated measures of ataxia and tremor need to be developed and employed in larger randomised controlled trials with careful blinding.
betamimetics help to delay delivery for women transferred to tertiary care or completed a course of antenatal corticosteroids. however, multiple adverse effects must be considered. the data are too few to support the use of any particular betamimetics. [note: the 14 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
based on the finding of two studies, it appears that intensive preoperative alcohol cessation interventions, including pharmacological strategies for relapse prophylaxis and withdrawal symptoms, may significantly reduce postoperative complication rates. no effect was found on mortality rates and length of stay. the effect of preoperative alcohol cessation intervention should be further explored in an effort to reduce the adverse effect of alcohol use on surgical outcomes. the number needed to screen to identify eligible patients for alcohol intervention studies in surgical settings seems to be extremely high. this may indicate that these studies are difficult to perform. nevertheless, timing, duration and intensity of alcohol cessation interventions need to be subject to further investigation.
clinicians must be aware that for the majority of antidepressant medications no evidence exists that supports their use for the treatment of abdominal pain-related fgids in children and adolescents. the existing randomised controlled evidence is limited to studies on amitriptyline and revealed no statistically significant differences between amitriptyline and placebo for most efficacy outcomes. amitriptyline does not appear to provide any benefit for the treatment of fgids in children and adolescents. studies in children with depressive disorders have shown that antidepressants can lead to substantial, sometimes life-threatening adverse effects. until better evidence evolves, clinicians should weigh the potential benefits of antidepressant treatment against known risks of antidepressants in paediatric patients.
hormone replacement therapy for women with endometriosis in post-surgical menopause could result in pain and disease recurrence. however, the evidence in the literature is not strong enough to suggest depriving severely symptomatic patients from this treatment. there is a need for more randomised controlled studies.
antibiotics appear to have no benefit in treating acute laryngitis. erythromycin could reduce voice disturbance at one week and cough at two weeks when measured subjectively. we consider that these outcomes are not relevant in clinical practice. the implications for practice are that prescribing antibiotics should not be done in the first instance as they will not objectively improve symptoms.
according to moderate quality evidence, corticosteroids given alone do not significantly hasten recovery from gbs or affect the long-term outcome. according to low quality evidence oral corticosteroids delay recovery. diabetes requiring insulin was significantly more common and hypertension less common with corticosteroids.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend increased garlic intake for preventing pre-eclampsia and its complications. although garlic is associated with odour, other more serious side-effects have not been reported. further large randomised trials evaluating the effects of garlic are needed before any recommendations can be made to guide clinical practice.
the selected studies provided no evidence that educational interventions are effective in decreasing injury rates among agricultural workers. financial incentives could reduce injury rates. legislation to ban pesticides could be effective. legislation expanding the use of safety devices (rops) on new tractors was associated with a decrease in fatal injuries.
although home-based hiv vct has the potential to enhance vct uptake in developing countries, insufficient data exist to recommend large-scale implementation of home-based hiv testing. further studies are needed to determine if home-based vct is better than facility-based vct in improving vct uptake.
high-dose ibuprofen can slow the progression of lung disease in people with cf, especially in children, which suggests that strategies to modulate lung inflammation can be beneficial for people with cf.
there are insufficient data to promote the use of intravenous midazolam infusion as a sedative for neonates undergoing intensive care. this review raises concerns about the safety of midazolam in neonates. further research on the effectiveness and safety of midazolam in neonates is needed.
evidence from this review does not support routine antioxidant supplementation during pregnancy to reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia and other serious complications in pregnancy.
the small number of trials identified for this review assessed several different drugs in a variety of patient populations. the focus of most of the included trials was on the treatment of diarrhoea, rather than faecal incontinence. there is little evidence to guide clinicians in the selection of drug therapies for faecal incontinence. larger, well-designed controlled trials, which use the recommendations and principles set out in the consort statement, and include clinically important outcome measures, are required.
there is not enough evidence to support the uncritical use of anti-cholinergic therapy for wheezing infants, although parents using it at home were able to identify benefits.
some herbal medicines may improve the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. however, positive findings from less rigorous trials should be interpreted with caution due to inadequate methodology, small sample sizes, and lack of confirming data. some herbal medicines deserve further examination in high-quality trials.
there is suggestive but inconclusive evidence of a benefit from midnight removal of the indwelling urethral catheter. there are resource implications but the magnitude of these is not clear from the trials. the evidence also suggests shorter hospital stay after early rather than delayed catheter removal but the effects on other outcomes are unclear. there is little evidence on which to judge other aspects of management, such as catheter clamping.
because of the small number of participants included in this review, limitations in the measurement and reporting of outcomes and the differing types of nerve blocks and timing of insertion, it is not possible to determine if nerve blocks confer any significant clinical benefit when compared with other analgesic methods as part of the treatment of a hip fracture. they do, however, reduce the degree of pain experienced by the patient from the hip fracture and subsequent surgery. further randomised trials with larger numbers of participants and full reporting of clinical outcomes would be justified.
alcohol rubs used in preparation for surgery by the scrub team are as effective as aqueous scrubbing in preventing ssis however this evidence comes from only one, equivalence, cluster trial which did not appear to adjust for clustering. four comparisons suggest that alcohol rubs are at least as, if not more, effective than aqueous scrubs though the quality of these is mixed and each study presents a different comparison, precluding meta analysis. there is no evidence to suggest that any particular alcohol rub is better than another. evidence from 4 studies suggests that chlorhexidine gluconate based aqueous scrubs are more effective than povidone iodine based aqueous scrubs in terms of the numbers of cfus on the hands. there is limited evidence regarding the effects on cfus numbers of different scrub durations. there is no evidence regarding the effect of equipment such as brushes and sponges.
early selective surfactant administration given to infants with rds requiring assisted ventilation leads to a decreased risk of acute pulmonary injury (decreased risk of pneumothorax and pulmonary interstitial emphysema) and a decreased risk of neonatal mortality and chronic lung disease compared to delaying treatment of such infants until they develop worsening rds.
there is weak evidence that some pharmacologic treatments (most of which are currently unavailable to the public) are better than no treatment for suppressing lactation symptoms in the first postpartum week. no evidence currently exists to indicate whether non-pharmacologic approaches are more effective than no treatment. presently, there is insufficient evidence to address the side effects of methods employed for suppressing lactation. when women desire treatment, bromocriptine may be considered where it is registered for lactation suppression in those without predisposition to its major side effects of public concerns. many trials did not contribute data that could be included in analyses. large randomised trials are needed to compare the effectiveness of pharmacologic (especially bromocriptine) and non-pharmacologic methods with no treatment. such trials should consider the acceptability of the intervention and lactation symptoms of concern to women and be large enough to detect clinically important differences in major side effects between comparison groups.
this review suggests that early feeding may be associated with a trend towards better outcomes in terms of survival and disability. further trials are required. these trials should report not only nutritional outcomes but also the effect on death and disability.
evidence suggests there is no difference in pregnancy rates among lng-20 ius, iud >250mm2 and norplant-2 users. the lng-20 ius more effectively prevented intrauterine and extrauterine pregnancies than iuds ≤250mm2. p4-ius was significantly more effective than non-medicated iuds, but no difference was observed when compared to iuds ≤250mm2. continuation rates for lng-20 ius, non-hormonal iuds and norplant-2 were similar. lack of menstrual bleeding was the main reason for discontinuation of lng-20 ius. recent evidence, from studies meeting the review inclusion criteria for the update conducted in july 2009, suggests that the lng-20 ius does not impact upon breastfeeding performance or the growth and development of breastfed infants in lactating women nor did the device have an adverse effect on glucose metabolism among insulin-dependent diabetic women.
in participants with chronic bronchitis or copd, treatment with a mucolytic may produce a small reduction in acute exacerbations, but may have little or no effect on the overall quality of life. the effects on exacerbations shown in early trials were larger than those found in the more recent studies. this may be because the earlier smaller trials were at higher risk of selection or publication bias, so the benefits of treatment may not be as large as suggested by the previous evidence.
this review highlights major methodological problems and sources of heterogeneity that not only hamper the comparability of trials but also preclude a conclusion on the efficacy of br in the adjunct treatment of pd patients with motor complications.
hypertension treatment lowers the relative and absolute risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in women ages 55 years and older, and in african american women of all ages. a greater effort should be made to increase awareness and treatment in these groups of women. although relative risk reductions for cerebrovascular and cardiovascular events are similar for younger and older women, the nnt of younger women is at least 4 times higher. decisions for treatment of hypertension in younger white women should be influenced by the individual patient's absolute risk of cardiovascular disease.
current evidence does not demonstrate a reduction in cld/death when intubated preterm infants are treated with erythromycin prophylactically before u. urealyticum culture/pcr results are known or when ureaplasma colonized, intubated preterm infants are treated with erythromycin. however, a true benefit could easily have been missed with the small sample sizes in the two eligible studies. the studies were greatly underpowered to detect uncommon adverse effects such as pyloric stenosis. additional controlled trials are required to determine whether antibiotic therapy of ureaplasma reduces cld and/or death in intubated preterm infants.
no practice recommendations could be drawn from this review. there is an urgent need to increase the number and quality of studies evaluating the effects of interventions in the management of cough in cancer.
we found no conclusive evidence that an oral anti-pseudomonal antibiotic regimen is more or less effective than an alternative treatment for either pulmonary exacerbations or long-term treatment of chronic infection with p. aeruginosa. until results of adequately-powered future trials are available, treatment needs to be selected on a pragmatic basis, based upon any available non-rct evidence, the clinical circumstances of the individual, the known effectiveness of drugs against local strains and upon individual preference.
the additional study did not change the results from the first review published in 2009, but does make the result more robust. single dose oral etoricoxib produces high levels of good quality pain relief after surgery and adverse events did not differ from placebo. the 120 mg dose is as effective as, or better than, other commonly used analgesics.
it was disappointing that there were so few studies which could be considered as being suitable for inclusion in this review. the findings from this review do not suggest that there should be any significant change from accepted conventional practice procedures when the pulp of the carious tooth is considered. further well designed rcts are needed to investigate the potential of contemporary materials which may be suitable when used in the management of carious teeth. it is recognised that it is difficult to establish the 'ideal' clinical study when ethical approval for new materials must be sought and strict attention to case selection, study protocol and interpretation of data is considered. it is also not easy to recruit sufficient numbers of patients meeting the necessary criteria.
this unexpected result is outside our current understanding of the use of vitamin a for preventing acute lrtis. accordingly, vitamin a should not be given to all children to prevent acute lrtis. despite its benefits in preventing diarrhoeal illnesses, vitamin a supplementation has only a limited effect in preventing acute lrtis. positive effects appear limited to populations with acute and chronic under nutrition. low-dose vitamin a appears to have fewer side effects and at least equal benefit to a high dose of vitamin a.
plasma exchange is effective in patients with severe arf secondary to vasculitis. on current data, the use of pulse cpa results in an increased risk of relapse when compared to continuous use but a reduced total dose. the use of cotrimoxazole is likely to be beneficial to prevent relapse of vasculitis. aza is effective as maintenance therapy once remission has been achieved.
oral diclofenac potassium 50 mg is an effective treatment for acute migraine, providing relief from pain and associated symptoms, although only a minority of patients experience pain-free responses. adverse events are mostly mild and transient and occur at the same rate as with placebo.
there is insufficient good evidence to enable robust conclusions to be made about oscillococcinum® in the prevention or treatment of influenza and influenza-like illness. our findings do not rule out the possibility that oscillococcinum® could have a clinically useful treatment effect but, given the low quality of the eligible studies, the evidence is not compelling. there was no evidence of clinically important harms due to oscillococcinum®.
this review does not support the routine use of intramuscular penicillin to prevent eogbsd in newborn infants. there is a discrepancy between this finding and the results of a number of larger non-randomised trials. explanations for this are proposed. there is a need for this intervention to be tested as a component of the existing prevention strategies in widespread use.
results from one study showed positive effects of omega-3 as an adjunctive treatment for depressive but not manic symptoms in bipolar disorder. these findings must be regarded with caution owing to the limited data available. there is an acute need for well-designed and executed randomised controlled trials in this field.
there is only one randomised trial that has addressed this question. the data from this study are inconclusive. we therefore conclude there is no evidence for or against the use of occlusal interventions in clinical practice. this question can only be addressed by adequately powered bias-protected randomised controlled trials.
the evidence did not generally show an association of bmi with effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives. however, the evidence was limited for any individual contraceptive method. studies using bmi (rather than weight alone) can provide more information about whether body composition is related to contraceptive effectiveness. the efficacy of subdermal implants and injectable contraceptives may be unaffected by body mass. the contraceptive methods examined here are among the most effective when the recommended regimen is followed. the overall quality of evidence was low for this review. more recent reports provided moderate quality evidence, while the older studies provided evidence of low or very low quality for our purposes. investigators should consider adjusting for potential confounding related to bmi. trials should be designed to include sufficient numbers of overweight or obese women to adequately examine effectiveness and side effects of hormonal contraceptives within those groups.
the review found no evidence to support changing catheters every 72 to 96 hours. consequently, healthcare organisations may consider changing to a policy whereby catheters are changed only if clinically indicated. this would provide significant cost savings and would spare patients the unnecessary pain of routine re-sites in the absence of clinical indications. to minimise peripheral catheter-related complications, the insertion site should be inspected at each shift change and the catheter removed if signs of inflammation, infiltration, or blockage are present.
although the use of probiotics appears to treat vaginal infections in pregnancy, there are currently insufficient data from trials to demonstrate any impact on preterm birth and its complications.
we found only low quality evidence comparing palliative surgery and medical management for bowel obstruction in ovarian cancer. therefore we are unable to reach definite conclusions about the relative benefits and harms of the two forms of treatment, or to identify sub-groups of women who are likely to benefit from one treatment or the other. however, there is weak evidence in support of surgical management to prolong survival.
stapled functional end to end ileocolic anastomosis is associated with fewer leaks than handsewn anastomosis.
there was weak evidence in included trials that any active drug was more effective than placebo for people with intellectual disability demonstrating sib. due to sparse data, an absence of power and statistical significance, and high risk of bias for four of the included trials, we are unable to reach any definite conclusions about the relative benefits of naltrexone or clomipramine compared to placebo.
late radiation cystitis is a relatively uncommon treatment complication and there are obvious difficulties in identifying sufficient patients to participate in a rct. the number of published reports is a reflection of the degree of medical interest that exists in providing therapeutic solutions for late radiation cystitis. however, in spite of the two studies of level iia evidence and the solitary rct it is difficult to draw any firm conclusions.
there was some evidence that electrical stimulation enhanced the effect of pfmt in the short term but not after six months. there were, however, more adverse effects (pain or discomfort) with electrical stimulation.
the available data from the trials included in this review suggest that the advantage of regular long term use of ipratropium alone or in combination with a short-acting beta-2 agonist or over a beta-2 agonist alone are small, if the aim is to improve lung function, symptoms and exercise tolerance. until further data are available, the strategy of providing a short-acting beta-2 agonist on a prn basis, and then either continuing with the short-acting beta-2 agonist regularly or conducting an "n of 1" trial of regular beta-2 agonist or regular anticholinergic to determine the treatment that gives the best relief of symptoms (and continuing with it), would seem cost effective. this strategy does need formal evaluation. patient preference is also important, as is the relative importance of avoiding the use of systemic corticosteroids.
there is limited evidence at this time to support the contention that interventions by bcns assist in the short-term with the recognition and management of psychological distress for women with breast cancer. further research is required before the impact of bcns on aspects of quality of life for women with breast cancer can be known.
the number and size of trials investigating adjunctive corticosteroids for hiv-infected patients with pcp is small, but evidence from this review suggests a beneficial effect for patients with substantial hypoxemia.
there is limited weak evidence suggesting that flapless implant placement is feasible and has been shown to reduce patient postoperative discomfort in adequately selected patients, that augmentation at implant sites with soft tissue grafts is effective in increasing soft tissue thickness improving aesthetics and that one technique to increase the height of keratinised mucosa using autografts or an animal-derived collagen matrix was able to achieve its goal but at the price of a worsened aesthetic outcome (0.5 mm of recession). there is insufficient reliable evidence to provide recommendations on which is the ideal flap design, the best soft tissue augmentation technique, whether techniques to increase the width of keratinised/attached mucosa are beneficial to patients or not, and which are the best incision/suture techniques/materials. properly designed and conducted rcts, with at least 6 months of follow-up, are needed to provide reliable answers to these questions.
there is no evidence to support - or refute - the use of dance therapy in this group of people. this therapy remains unproven and those with schizophrenia, their carers, trialists and funders of research may wish to encourage future work to increase high quality evidence in this area. [note: the citation in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
cognitive reframing for family carers of people with dementia seems to reduce psychological morbidity and subjective stress but without altering appraisals of coping or burden. the results suggest that it may be an effective component of individualised, multi-component interventions for carers. identifying studies with relevant interventions was a challenge for this review. the impact of cognitive reframing might be higher when used alongside other interventions because this offers better opportunities to tailor cognitive reframing to actual everyday carer problems.
there is currently no evidence to support the use of ics for treatment of subacute cough in children. however, this systematic review is limited by the small number of studies available for analysis and the size, quality and design of these studies. further well-designed rcts are required to support or refute the efficacy of treatment with ics in children with subacute cough.
in general, women who undergo amniocentesis could be informed that pain during procedure is minor and that there is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of local anaesthetics, leg rubbing or subfreezing the needle for pain reduction during procedure.
the addition of platinum-based chemotherapy to adjuvant radiotherapy (chemoradiation) may improve survival in women with early stage cervical cancer (ia2-iia) and risk factors for recurrence. adjuvant chemoradiation is associated with an increased risk of severe acute toxicity, although it is not clear whether this toxicity is significant in the long-term due to a lack of long-term data. this evidence is limited by the small numbers and poor methodological quality of included studies. we await the results of three ongoing trials, that are likely to have an important impact on our confidence in this evidence.
tiotropium reduced copd exacerbations and related hospitalisations compared to placebo and ipratropium. it also improved health-related quality-of-life and symptom scores among patients with moderate and severe disease, and may have slowed decline in fev1. additional long-term studies are required to evaluate its effect on mortality and change in fev1 to clarify its role in comparison to, or in combination with, long-acting ß2-agonists and to assess its effectiveness in mild and very severe copd.
there is no evidence to support the use of azathioprine for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. researchers who are interested in performing further randomised clinical trials should be aware of the risks of adverse events.
at least in the short term, documentation of tobacco status and increased referral to cessation counseling do appear to increase following the introduction of an expectation to use the ehr to record and treat patient tobacco use at medical visits. there is a need for additional research to further understand the effect of ehrs on smoking treatment in healthcare settings.
we found no evidence of a significant difference between depot and daily gnrha use for pituitary down regulation in ivf cycles using the long protocol, but substantial differences could not be ruled out. since depot gnrha requires more gonadotrophins and a longer duration of use, it may increase the overall costs of ivf treatment.
in children and adults with persistent asthma and in preschool children suspected of persistent asthma, there was low quality evidence that intermittent and daily ics strategies were similarly effective in the use of rescue oral corticosteroids and the rate of severe adverse health events. the strength of the evidence means that we cannot currently assume equivalence between the two options.. daily ics was superior to intermittent ics in several indicators of lung function, airway inflammation, asthma control and reliever use. both treatments appeared safe, but a modest growth suppression was associated with daily, compared to intermittent, inhaled budesonide and beclomethasone. clinicians should carefully weigh the potential benefits and harm of each treatment option, taking into account the unknown long-term (> one year) impact of intermittent therapy on lung growth and lung function decline.
the combination of ibuprofen 400 mg plus codeine 25.6 to 60 mg demonstrates good analgesic efficacy. very limited data suggest that the combination is better than the same dose of either drug alone. use of combination analgesics that contain codeine has been a source of some concern because of misuse from over-the-counter preparations.
antibiotic treatment reduces the risk of active trachoma and ocular chlamydial infection in people infected with c. trachomatis, but we do not know for certain the size of the treatment effect in individuals. mass antibiotic treatment with single-dose oral azithromycin reduces the prevalence of active trachoma and ocular infection in communities.
lamotrigine was significantly less likely to be withdrawn than carbamazepine but results for time to first seizure suggested that carbamazepine may be superior in terms of seizure control. trials were of too short a duration to measure important seizure outcomes such as time to 12 month remission. further trials are needed in which longer-term outcome is assessed as well as measures such as psychosocial outcome and quality of life.
we found insufficient evidence to confirm or refute the benefits of problem solving therapy as an additional treatment for those with schizophrenia. the small number of participants, the quality of reporting of methods and results were of concern. more trials with adequate reporting of methods to minimize bias, adequately powered, with validated, reliable and clinically meaningful outcomes are needed to provide robust evidence to guide policy and practice.
synthetic progestogens should be used with significant caution in the postpartum period. the role of natural progesterone in the prevention and treatment of postpartum depression has yet to be evaluated in a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. oestrogen therapy may be of modest value for the treatment of severe postpartum depression. its role in the prevention of recurrent postpartum depression has not been rigorously evaluated. further research is warranted.
endovascular treatment is associated with an increased risk of peri-procedural stroke or death compared with endarterectomy. however, this excess risk appears to be limited to older patients. the longer term efficacy of endovascular treatment and the risk of restenosis are unclear and require further follow-up of existing trials. further trials are needed to determine the optimal treatment for asymptomatic carotid stenosis.
to date there is only a small and heterogeneous body of evidence on the effectiveness of family oriented approaches for bipolar disorder, and it is not yet possible to draw any definite conclusions to support their use as an adjunctive treatment for bipolar disorder. further well designed rcts should be a research priority.
in steroid-naive patients with mild to moderate airway obstruction, the combination of ics and laba does not significantly reduce the risk of patients with exacerbations requiring rescue oral corticosteroids over that achieved with a similar dose of ics alone. however, it significantly improves lung function, reduces symptoms and marginally decreases rescue ß2-agonist use. initiation of a higher dose of ics is more effective at reducing the risk of exacerbations requiring rescue systemic corticosteroids, and of withdrawals, than combination therapy. although children appeared to respond similarly to adults, no firm conclusions can be drawn regarding combination therapy in steroid-naive children, given the small number of children contributing data.
the effects of continuous passive motion on knee range of motion are too small to justify its use. there is weak evidence that continuous passive motion reduces the subsequent need for manipulation under anaesthesia.
three to six days of oral antibiotics had comparable efficacy compared to the standard duration 10-day course of oral penicillin in treating children with acute gabhs pharyngitis. . in areas where the prevalence of rheumatic heart disease is still high, our results must be interpreted with caution.
prednisolone in low doses (not exceeding 15 mg daily) may be used intermittently in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, particularly if the disease cannot be controlled by other means. the risk of harms needs to be considered, however, especially the risk of fractures and infections. since prednisolone is highly effective, short-term placebo controlled trials studying the clinical effect of low-dose prednisolone or other oral corticosteroids are no longer necessary.
current evidence about the therapeutic benefit of mechanical ventilation is weak, but consistent, suggesting alleviation of the symptoms of chronic hypoventilation in the short-term. in three small studies survival was prolonged mainly in participants with motor neuron diseases. with the exception of motor neuron disease, further larger randomised trials are needed to confirm long-term beneficial effects of nocturnal mechanical ventilation on quality of life, morbidity and mortality, to assess its cost-benefit ratio in neuromuscular and chest wall diseases and to compare the different types and modes of ventilation.
we conclude that for patients with vap not due to nf-gnb, a short fixed-course (seven or eight days) antibiotic therapy may be more appropriate than a prolonged course (10 to 15 days). use of an individualised strategy (incorporating clinical features or serum procalcitonin) appears to safely reduce duration of antibiotic therapy for vap.
in summary, the currently available evidence suggests an os, crr and pfs benefit for alemtuzumab compared with no further therapy, but an increased risk for infections in general, cmv infections and cmv reactivations. the role of alemtuzumab versus rituximab still remains unclear, further trials with longer follow-up and overall survival as primary endpoint are needed to evaluate the effects of both agents compared with each other. alemtuzumab compared with chlorambucil seems to be favourable in terms of pfs, but a longer follow-up period and trials with overall survival as primary endpoint are needed to determine whether this effect will translate into a survival advantage.
prophylactic cranial irradiation significantly improves survival and disease-free survival for patients with small cell lung cancer in complete remission. further clinical trials are needed to confirm the potential greater benefit on brain metastasis rate suggested when cranial irradiation is given earlier or at higher doses.
a limited number of studies suggest there may be a benefit of music therapy on the quality of life of people in end-of-life care. however, the results stem from studies with a high risk of bias. more research is needed.
sulthiame may lead to a cessation of seizures when used as an add-on therapy to pyridoxine in patients with west syndrome. the included study was small and had a significant risk of bias which limits the impact of the evidence. no conclusions can be drawn on the occurrence of adverse drug effects, change in quality of life or mean reduction in seizure frequency. no evidence exists for the use of sulthiame as an add-on therapy in patients with epilepsy outside west syndrome. large, multi-centre randomised controlled trials are necessary to inform clinical practice if sulthiame is to be used as an add-on therapy for epilepsy.
there is evidence that addition of ifn as maintenance therapy for fl improves progression-free survival. a net benefit for overall survival is less evident. in the included studies, ifn was associated with significant toxicities that may have a major impact on a patient's quality of life.
overall there was no convincing evidence of a clinically important difference in prosthesis failure, implant failure, or bone loss associated with different loading times of implants. the quality of the evidence is assessed as very low due to high and unclear risk of bias of primary studies and there is some evidence of reporting bias so clinicians should treat these findings with caution. a high value of insertion torque (at least 35 ncm) seems to be one of the prerequisites for a successful immediate/early loading procedure. more well-designed rcts are needed and should be reported according to the consort guidelines (www.consort-statement.org/), and registered with a trials registry.
the hypothesis that nebulized morphine may reduce dyspnoea in patients with interstitial lung disease has not been confirmed in the single small rct identified.
although there is some evidence that mild hypothermia is safe, its effectiveness is not clear when compared with normothermia. we need to perform more clinical trials in order to establish the benefit, if any, of hypothermia for cerebral protection during brain surgery before making firm recommendations for the routine use of this intervention.
given the current evidence base, which is limited to fourteen relatively small trials all evaluating different macronutrient supplements in different populations at different stages of hiv infection and with varying treatment status, no firm conclusions can be drawn about the effects of macronutrient supplementation on morbidity and mortality in people living with hiv. it is, however, promising to see more studies being conducted in low-income countries, and particularly in children, where macronutrient supplementation both pre-antiretroviral treatment and in conjunction with antiretroviral treatment might prove to be beneficial.
insufficient evidence is available to advocate for or against the use of antibiotics in the therapy for leptospirosis. among survivors who were hospitalised for leptospirosis, use of antibiotics for leptospirosis may have decreased the duration of clinical illness by two to four days, though this result was not statistically significant. when electing to treat with an antibiotic, selection of penicillin, doxycycline, or cephalosporin does not seem to impact mortality nor duration of fever. the benefit of antibiotic therapy in the treatment of leptospirosis remains unclear, particularly for severe disease. further clinical research is needed to include broader panels of therapy tested against placebo.
conclusions are limited by the identification of only one trial, the methodological shortcomings of that trial, and the absence of data on accidental pregnancies. however, the trial found no important differences in bleeding patterns between the biphasic and monophasic preparations studied. since no clear rationale exists for biphasic pills and since extensive evidence is available for monophasic pills, the latter are preferred.
clozapine may be a little more efficacious than zotepine and risperidone but further trials are required to confirm this finding. clozapine differs more clearly in adverse effects from other second generation antipsychotics and the side-effect profile could be key in the selection of treatment depending on the clinical situation and a patient’s preferences. data on other important outcomes such as cognitive functioning, quality of life, death or service use are currently largely missing, making further large and well-designed trials necessary. it is also important to take into account that the large number of people leaving the studies early limits the validity and interpretation of our findings.
there is insufficient evidence with which to assess the effectiveness of surgical and non-surgical interventions for morton's neuroma. well designed trials are needed to begin to establish an evidence base for the treatment of morton's neuroma pain.
based on the available rcts, there is no reliable evidence supporting the superiority of one type of treatment for pulpally involved primary molars. no conclusions can be made as to the optimum treatment or techniques for pulpally involved primary molar teeth due to the scarcity of reliable scientific research. high quality rcts, with appropriate unit of randomisation and analysis are needed.
in mild asthma it is not yet known whether patients who use a budesonide/formoterol inhaler for relief of asthma symptoms derive any clinically important benefits. in more severe asthma, two studies enrolled patients who were not controlled on inhaled corticosteroids, and had suffered an exacerbation in the previous year, and then had their maintenance inhaled corticosteroids reduced in both arms of the study. under these conditions the studies demonstrated a reduction in the risk of exacerbations that require oral corticosteroids with budesonide/formoterol for maintenance and relief in comparison with budesonide/formoterol for maintenance and terbutaline or formoterol for relief. the incidence of serious adverse events in children was also less using budesonide/formoterol for maintenance and relief in one study, which similarly enrolled children who were not controlled on inhaled corticosteroids, and who had their maintenance inhaled corticosteroids reduced at the start of the study. this study also compared an explorative maintenance dose of budesonide/formoterol that is not approved for treatment.
there are no good quality randomized trials evaluating the effects of adjunct use of topical corticosteroids in bacterial keratitis. the only randomized trial we identified in the literature suffered from major methodological inadequacies.
there is little evidence that tcs offer significant benefits in comparison with other residential treatment, or that one type of tc is better than another. prison tc may be better than prison on it's own or mental health treatment programmes to prevent re-offending post-release for in-mates. however, methodological limitations of the studies may have introduced bias and firm conclusions cannot be drawn due to limitations of the existing evidence.
some women may benefit from the interventions described, particularly with cessation of current bleeding. several regimens offer promise in regulating bleeding, but findings need to be reproduced in larger trials. the results of this review do not support routine clinical use of any of the regimens included in the trials, particularly for long-term effect.
infants ventilated using vtv modes had reduced death and chronic lung disease compared with infants ventilated using plv modes. further studies are needed to identify whether vtv modes improve neurodevelopmental outcomes and to compare and refine vtv strategies.
there is insufficient evidence supporting the effectiveness of educational interventions targeting nursing staff for preventing or reducing the use of physical restraints in geriatric long-term care.
this review complements data on post-operative nausea and vomiting suggesting a biologic effect of acupuncture-point stimulation. electroacupuncture has demonstrated benefit for chemotherapy-induced acute vomiting, but studies combining electroacupuncture with state-of-the-art antiemetics and in patients with refractory symptoms are needed to determine clinical relevance. self-administered acupressure appears to have a protective effect for acute nausea and can readily be taught to patients though studies did not involve placebo control. noninvasive electrostimulation appears unlikely to have a clinically relevant impact when patients are given state-of-the-art pharmacologic antiemetic therapy.
there is some indication that selenium supplementation may be a useful adjunct to medication for patients with chronic asthma. this conclusion is limited because of insufficient studies and lack of improvement in the clinical parameters of lung function.
there is limited evidence that a cl is effective in terms of medical costs and improvement of physical functioning for patients with mups in primary care. the results are even less pronounced in patients with clinically less severe, but more meaningful, forms of mups and the results vary for other patient-related outcomes. all studies, except one, were performed in the united states and therefore the results can not be generalized directly to countries with other healthcare systems. furthermore all studies were small and of only moderate quality. there is very limited evidence that a joint consultation with the patient by a psychiatrist in the presence of the physician, together with the provision of a cl, reduces severity of somatization symptoms and medical consumption.
there was no statistically significant difference identified between women in spontaneous labour with epidural analgesia who were augmented with oxytocin, compared with those who received placebo. however, due to the limited number of women included in the studies, further research in the form of randomised controlled trials are required.
there is some evidence that mass media can prevent the uptake of smoking in young people, however the evidence is not strong and contains a number of methodological flaws.
steam inhalation (or cool mist therapy) is commonly used to treat acute bronchiolitis in resource-constrained settings. one study was eligible for inclusion and found that nebulised salbutamol was an effective intervention for young children with bronchiolitis but mist in a tent did not lead to a significant decrease in rds score. since only one study was analysed it would be misleading to conclude that mist therapy is ineffective in children with bronchiolitis. we conclude that there is insufficient evidence to inform practice regarding using steam inhalation or mist therapy for acute bronchiolitis in children up to three years old.
bilayer artificial skin, used in conjunction with compression bandaging, increases venous ulcer healing compared with a simple dressing plus compression. further research is needed to assess whether other forms of skin grafts increase ulcer healing.
appropriately resourced esd services provided for a selected group of stroke patients can reduce long-term dependency and admission to institutional care as well as reducing the length of hospital stay. we observed no adverse impact on the mood or subjective health status of patients or carers.
there is not enough evidence to conclude that gangliosides are beneficial in acute stroke. caution is warranted because of reports of sporadic cases of guillain-barré syndrome after ganglioside therapy.
the pooled data demonstrate no benefit and some harm from the use of antihistamines or decongestants alone or in combination in the management of ome, therefore we recommend against their use.
the available evidence is not sufficient to recommend the use of methotrexate to maintain remission in patients with ulcerative colitis. a large scale methodologically rigorous randomized controlled trial is needed. such a study should investigate higher doses of methotrexate and parenteral administration.
trials published to date lack information on clinically relevant end-points. existing data is derived from small trials at high risk of bias, which concentrate on physiological measures. their results are inconclusive. further large and high quality trials with more appropriate outcomes are warranted.
these findings are equivocal and, although some of the results of individual studies suggest a positive effect of intercessory prayer, the majority do not and the evidence does not support a recommendation either in favour or against the use of intercessory prayer. we are not convinced that further trials of this intervention should be undertaken and would prefer to see any resources available for such a trial used to investigate other questions in health care.
ciclesonide was more effective than placebo, in the short term, in improving lung function in patients with mild to moderate asthma previously treated with inhaled corticosteroids. there remain questions as to dose response, and the lack of data on the longer term impact on exacerbations and safety profile should be addressed in future studies.
establishing systems for patient care using telecommunications technologies is feasible, but there is little evidence of clinical benefits. the studies provided variable and inconclusive results for other outcomes such as psychological measures, and no analysable data about the cost effectiveness of telemedicine systems. the review demonstrates the need for further research and the fact that it is feasible to carry out randomised trials of telemedicine applications. policy makers should be cautious about recommending increased use and investment in unevaluated technologies.
the two trials comparing tolcapone with the dopamine agonists bromocriptine and pergolide were underpowered to detect clinically relevant differences between them. this is based on medium-term evidence. no evidence was found comparing entacapone with active comparators. further larger and longer-term trials are required to compare tolcapone with entacapone and comt inhibitor therapy with alternative adjuvant classes of drug in later parkinson's disease such as dopamine agonists and monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
second trimester amniocentesis is safer than early amniocentesis or transcervical cvs, and is the procedure of choice for second trimester testing. transabdominal cvs should be regarded as the procedure of first choice when testing is done before 15 weeks' gestation. diagnostic accuracy of different methods could not be assessed adequately because of incomplete karyotype data in most studies.
there is no evidence from controlled clinical trials that postnatal thyroid hormone treatment reduces the severity of respiratory distress syndrome, neonatal morbidity or mortality in preterm infants with respiratory distress syndrome.
results from two randomised controlled clinical trials suggest that the amifostine has no significant radioprotective effects on salivary glands in high-dose radioactive iodine treated differentiated thyroid cancer patients. moreover, no health-related quality of life and other patient-oriented outcomes were evaluated in the two included trials. randomised controlled clinical trials with low risk of bias investigating patient-oriented outcomes are needed to guide treatment choice.
a lack of rigorously designed trials (excluding one recent german study) provides only limited evidence of the effectiveness of educational and psychological interventions in helping to manage the condition of children with atopic eczema. evidence from included studies and also adult studies indicates that different service delivery models (multi-professional eczema school and nurse-led clinics) require further and comparative evaluation to examine their cost-effectiveness and suitability for different health systems.
there are too few data to guide patients, carers, clinicians or policy makers. current practice has to be guided by evidence other than that derived from randomised trials and more trials in this important area are indicated.
this review does not provide the evidence to support the use of gaba receptor agonists (chlormethiazole or diazepam) for the treatment of patients with acute ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke. chlormethiazole appeared to be beneficial in improving functional independence in patients with tacs according to the subgroup analysis, but this result must be interpreted with great caution. more well-designed rcts with large samples of tacs would be required for further confirmation. however, somnolence and rhinitis are frequent adverse events related to chlormethiazole.
trimetazidine, methylprednisolone, and dextrose may protect against ischaemia reperfusion injury in elective liver resections performed under vascular occlusion, but this is shown in trials with small sample sizes and high risk of bias. the use of these drugs should be restricted to well-designed randomised clinical trials before implementing them in clinical practice.
ttm soc and a combination of physical activity, diet and other interventions resulted in minimal weight loss, and there was no conclusive evidence for sustainable weight loss. the impact of ttm soc as theoretical framework in weight loss management may depend on how it is used as a framework for intervention and in combination with other strategies like diet and physical activities.
no evidence is available using calcium antagonists in patients with acute ischemic stroke is effective.
there is currently insufficient evidence to make conclusions about whether intraoperative peep alters the risk of postoperative mortality and respiratory complications among undifferentiated surgical patients.
there is limited evidence of benefit from intra-venous albumin administration at the time of oocyte retrieval in the prevention or reduction of the incidence of severe ohss in high risk women undergoing ivf or icsi treatment cycles. hydroxyethyl starch markedly decreases the incidence of severe ohss.
the small size of this study and other methodological problems do not allow any firm conclusions to be drawn regarding the efficacy and safety of lisuride compared with bromocriptine in advanced parkinson's disease with motor complications.
the results of this cochrane review do not allow us to draw firm conclusions about the most effective types of intervention for increasing healthcare professionals' adoption of sdm. healthcare professional training may be important, as may the implementation of patient-mediated interventions such as decision aids. given the paucity of evidence, however, those motivated by the ethical impetus to increase sdm in clinical practice will need to weigh the costs and potential benefits of interventions. subsequent research should involve well-designed studies with adequate power and procedures to minimise bias so that they may improve estimates of the effects of interventions on healthcare professionals' adoption of sdm. from a measurement perspective, consensus on how to assess professionals' adoption of sdm is desirable to facilitate cross-study comparisons.
we found only one study suggesting that integrating perinatal pmtct interventions with other healthcare services in low- and middle-income countries increases the proportion of pregnant women, mothers and infants receiving pmtct intervention. the weak evidence base does not enable making any inferences for other countries or contexts. the study that met the inclusion criteria assessed only the impact of integrating pmtct intervention in labour ward on the proportion of mothers and their infants receiving nevirapine. the study showed significant improvement in intervention coverage but it only addressed the labour ward aspect of pmtct programme. we did not find sufficient evidence to make definitive conclusions about the effectiveness of integration of these interventions with other health services rather than providing them as stand-alone services. further research is urgently needed to assess the effect of integrating perinatal prevention of mother-to-child hiv transmission interventions with other health services on intervention coverage, service uptake, quality of care and health outcomes and the optimal integration modality.
this review supports the hypothesis that specialist outreach can improve access, outcomes and service use, especially when delivered as part of a multifaceted intervention. the benefits of simple outreach models in urban non-disadvantaged settings seem small. there is a need for good comparative studies of outreach in rural and disadvantaged settings where outreach may confer most benefit to access and health outcomes.
for women who undergo caesarean section, carbetocin resulted in a statistically significant reduction in the need for therapeutic uterotonics compared to oxytocin, but there is no difference in the incidence of postpartum haemorrhage. carbetocin is associated with less blood loss compared to syntometrine in the prevention of pph for women who have vaginal deliveries and is associated with significantly fewer adverse effects. further research is needed to analyse the cost-effectiveness of carbetocin as a uterotonic agent.
the results are derived from relatively small trials. prostaglandins used alone seems to be less effective and more painful compared to surgical first-trimester abortion. however, there is inadequate evidence to comment on the acceptability and side effects of medical compared to surgical first-trimester abortions. there is a need for trials to address the efficacy of currently used methods and women's preferences more reliably.
decompressive surgery is used for treating nerve damage in leprosy but the available evidence from rcts is of very low quality and does not show a significant added benefit of surgery over steroid treatment alone. well-designed rcts are needed to establish the effectiveness of the combination of surgery and medical treatment compared to medical treatment alone.
despite the inclusion of more studies with a total of 5805 participants, there is no statistically significant evidence that patients benefit from mechanical bowel preparation, nor the use of rectal enemas. in colonic surgery the bowel cleansing can be safely omitted and induces no lower complication rate. the few studies focused in rectal surgery suggested that mechanical bowel preparation could be used selectively, even though no significant effect was found. further research on patients submitted for elective rectal surgery, below the peritoneal verge, in whom bowel continuity is restored, and studies with patients submitted to laparoscopic surgeries are still warranted.
taking any vitamin supplements prior to pregnancy or in early pregnancy does not prevent women experiencing miscarriage or stillbirth. however, women taking vitamin supplements may be more likely to have a multiple pregnancy. there is insufficient evidence to examine the effects of different combinations of vitamins on miscarriage, stillbirth or other maternal and infant outcomes.
these results suggest that there is a significant benefit in symptom control and physiologic outcomes from hawthorn extract as an adjunctive treatment for chronic heart failure.
theophylline is more effective than mask cpap for preterm infants with apnea. since cpap is no longer administered by mask, the results of this review have limited importance for current clinical practice. further evaluation of the benefits and harms of cpap vs theophylline for preterm infants with apnea requires further trials in which cpap is administered by current methods.
there were no studies addressing chronic pain in sickle cell disease. there is limited evidence for analgesic interventions in acute pain crises. studies have been under-powered. there is not enough data for inter-trial comparisons. in one trial, there was no difference in the efficacy of sustained-release oral versus parenteral morphine, which suggests that oral morphine should be considered for acute pain. parenteral corticosteroids appear to shorten the period over which analgesics are required and hospital length-of-stay, without producing short-term major adverse effects.more research is needed to improve pain management in sickle cell disease.
whilst results from some individual studies suggested a beneficial effect of pge1, the quality of these studies and of the overall evidence available is insufficient to determine whether or not patients with intermittent claudication derive clinically meaningful benefit from the administration of prostanoids. further well-conducted randomised, double blinded trials with a sufficient number of participants to provide statistical power are required to answer this question.
the current data does not allow for a definitive conclusion regarding the efficacy of fish oil. there is no adequate information to make recommendations for clinical practice. more research is required.
based on the results of this systematic review the administration of antibiotic prophylaxis for elective inguinal hernia repair cannot be universally recommended. neither can the administration be recommended against when high rates of wound infection are observed.
we observed no significant difference between ial and ivas with regard to the immediate success rate of reduction, pain during reduction, post-reduction pain relief and reduction failure. compared to ivas, ial may be less expensive and may be associated with fewer adverse effects and a shorter recovery time.
there is insufficient evidence to determine the relative effectiveness of double-bundle and single-bundle reconstruction for anterior cruciate ligament rupture in adults, although there is limited evidence that double-bundle acl reconstruction has some superior results in objective measurements of knee stability and protection against repeat acl rupture or a new meniscal injury. high quality, large and appropriately reported randomised controlled trials of double-bundle versus single-bundle reconstruction for anterior cruciate ligament rupture in adults appear justified.
herpes zoster vaccine is effective in preventing herpes zoster disease. although vaccine benefits are larger in the younger age group (60 to 69 years), this is also the age group with more adverse events. in general, zoster vaccine is well tolerated; it produces few systemic adverse events and injection site adverse effects of mild to moderate intensity.
the included trial failed to demonstrate any statistically significant efficacy of imiquimod in the management of anal intraepithelial neoplasia (ain). the absence of reliable evidence for any of the interventions used in ain precludes any definitive guidance or recommendations for clinical practice. prospective cohort studies and retrospective studies have not been included in this review as they are considered to provide lower quality evidence. well designed rcts are needed.
lmwh and ufh had similar risk of mortality, recurrent angina, and major or minor bleeding but lmwh had decreased risk of mi, revascularization and thrombocytopenia. new trials with longer follow up are required.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of intravenous in-line filters to prevent morbidity and mortality in neonates.
adding antiplatelet therapy, either dipyridamole or low-dose aspirin, to oral anticoagulation decreases the risk of systemic embolism or death among patients with prosthetic heart valves. the risk of major bleeding is increased with antiplatelet therapy. these results apply to patients with mechanical prosthetic valves or those with biological valves and indicators of high risk such as atrial fibrillation or prior thromboembolic events. the effectiveness and safety of low dose aspirin (100 mg daily) appears to be similar to higher dose aspirin and dipyridamole.
our review offers encouraging evidence of the value of integrating maternal and newborn care in community settings through a range of interventions which can be packaged effectively for delivery through a range of community health workers and health promotion groups. while the importance of skilled delivery and facility-based services for maternal and newborn care cannot be denied, there is sufficient evidence to scale up community-based care through packages which can be delivered by a range of community-based workers.
in one trial that enrolled infants with gram-negative meningitis and ventriculitis, the use of intraventricular antibiotics in addition to intravenous antibiotics resulted in a three-fold increased rr for mortality compared to standard treatment with intravenous antibiotics alone. based on this result, intraventricular antibiotics as tested in this trial should be avoided. further trials comparing these interventions are not justified in this population.
this meta-analysis provides evidence supporting the recommendation for ppv to prevent ipd in adults. the evidence from rcts is less clear with respect to adults with chronic illness. this might be because of lack of effect or lack of power in the studies. the meta-analysis does not provide evidence to support the routine use of ppv to prevent all-cause pneumonia or mortality.
praziquantel 40 mg/kg as the standard treatment for s. mansoni infection is consistent with the evidence. oxamniquine, a largely discarded alternative, also appears effective. further research will help find the optimal dosing regimen of both these drugs in children. combination therapy, ideally with drugs with unrelated mechanisms of action and targeting the different developmental stages of the schistosomes in the human host should be pursued as an area for future research.
there is very low quality evidence that pre-employment examinations that are specific to certain jobs or health problems could reduce occupational disease, injury, or sickness absence. this supports the current policy to restrict pre-employment examinations to job-specific examinations. more studies are needed that take into account the harms of rejecting job applicants.
ipc may increase healing compared with no compression, but it is not clear whether it increases healing when added to treatment with bandages, or if it can be used instead of compression bandages. rapid ipc was better than slow ipc in one trial. further trials are required to determine whether ipc increases the healing of venous leg ulcers when used in modern practice where compression therapy is widely used.
relaxation and yoga may have a role with reducing pain, increasing satisfaction with pain relief and reducing the rate of assisted vaginal delivery. there was insufficient evidence for the role of music and audio-analgesia. however, there is a need for further research.
in six studies we found no evidence of a significant difference in the subjective loudness of tinnitus. however, we found a significant improvement in depression score (in six studies) and quality of life (decrease of global tinnitus severity) in another five studies, suggesting that cbt has a positive effect on the management of tinnitus.
combination ics and laba significantly reduces morbidity and mortality in copd when compared with monocomponent steroid. adverse events were not significantly different between treatments, although evidence from other sources indicates that inhaled corticosteroids are associated with increased risk of pneumonia. assessment of bdf in larger, long-term trials is required. dose response data would provide valuable evidence on whether efficacy and safety outcomes are affected by different steroid loads.
a limited number of small studies have shown that nedocromil is of benefit in improving lung function and some measures of symptoms, but the evidence with regard to the primary outcome of the review was conflicting. two long-term trials did not show consistent effects on lung function outcomes, whereas several small short-term trials have shown benefit in these outcomes. differing severities at baseline may explain this difference with milder participants experiencing less benefit, although the discrepancy between study findings may also reflect publication bias. nedocromil sodium is associated with a very good safety profile with no significant short term or long- term adverse side effects. although nedocromil may have advantages over inhaled corticosteroids in terms of side effects, there is a need for head to head trials of nedocromil and inhaled corticosteroids to establish whether asthma control is similar, especially in mild asthma. it is not yet clear where nedocromil should sit in relation to other therapies in the treatment of asthma in children.
a single dose immediately following surgery is ineffective based on one study. gemcitabine may be more active than mitomycin c with a lower toxicity profile. compared to intravesical bcg therapy, gemcitabine had similar effects in intermediate risk patients, less effective in high risk patient and superior in bcg refractory patients. however, each randomised trial identified represents a different clinical setting in nmibc and therefore the evidence base is limited. consequently these data should be interpreted with caution until further corroborative evidence becomes available. the aim of intravesical therapy in nmibc is to prevent tumour recurrence and progression and to avoid the morbidity associated with cystectomy. intravesical gemcitabine is a promising drug that may add to the urologist's options in achieving this goal.
our systematic review could not specify which type of post and core system should be used when two or three dentine walls remain. more rcts are needed to confirm whether fibre-reinforced post and core systems are superior and to clarify the influence of the remaining tooth structure on the treatment outcome of the different post and core systems available. well-defined inclusion criteria focusing on the number of dentine walls (two or three) should be used.
we could not find evidence supporting or refuting the use of same for patients with alcoholic liver diseases. we need more long-term, high-quality randomised trials on same for these patients before same may be recommended for clinical practice.
tramadol is an effective treatment for neuropathic pain.
treatment of latent tuberculosis infection reduces the risk of active tb in hiv positive individuals especially in those with a positive tuberculin skin test. the choice of regimen will depend on factors such as availability, cost, adverse effects, adherence and drug resistance. future studies should assess these aspects. in addition, trials evaluating the long-term effects of anti-tuberculosis chemoprophylaxis, the optimal duration of tb preventive therapy, the influence of level of immunocompromise on effectiveness and combination of anti-tuberculosis chemoprophylaxis with antiretroviral therapy are needed.
all shunts resulted in a significantly lower rebleeding rate at the expense of a higher incidence of encephalopathy. tips was complicated by a high incidence of shunt dysfunction. no survival advantage was demonstrated with any shunt.
there is little useful high-level evidence to judge the effectiveness of inhaled antibiotics for the treatment of pulmonary exacerbations in people with cystic fibrosis. the included trials were not sufficiently powered to achieve their goals. hence, we are unable to demonstrate whether one treatment was superior to the other or not. further research is needed to establish whether inhaled tobramycin may be used as an alternative to intravenous tobramycin for some pulmonary exacerbations.
eight week courses of cyclophosphamide or chlorambucil and prolonged courses of cyclosporin and levamisole reduce the risk of relapse in children with relapsing ssns compared with corticosteroids alone. clinically important differences in efficacy are possible and further comparative studies are still needed.
two eligible studies on the use of heparin-bonded catheters versus placebo in children were identified. the use of heparin-bonded catheters is a promising therapy but warrants further studies.
multiple, good-quality studies demonstrate superior efficacy of two-drug combinations. however, the number of available studies for any one specific combination, as well as other study factors (e.g. limited trial size and duration), preclude the recommendation of any one specific drug combination for neuropathic pain. demonstration of combination benefits by several studies together with reports of widespread clinical polypharmacy for neuropathic pain surely provide a rationale for additional future rigorous evaluations. in order to properly identify specific drug combinations which provide superior efficacy and/or safety, we recommend that future neuropathic pain studies of two-drug combinations include comparisons with placebo and both single-agent components. given the apparent adverse impact of combining agents with similar adverse effect profiles (e.g. cns depression), the anticipated development and availability of non-sedating neuropathic pain agents could lead to the identification of more favourable analgesic drug combinations in which side effects are not compounded.
overall, thrombolytic therapy appears to result in a significant net reduction in the proportion of patients dead or dependent in activities of daily living. this overall benefit was apparent despite an increase both in deaths (evident at seven to 10 days and at final follow up) and in symptomatic intracranial haemorrhages. further trials are needed to identify which patients are most likely to benefit from treatment and the environment in which thrombolysis may best be given in routine practice.
a daily dose of prednisolone 7.5-10 mg/day appears to be equivalent to moderate-high dose inhaled corticosteroids. side-effects may be present on low doses, so if there is no alternative to oral steroids, the lowest effective dose should be prescribed.
azapirones appeared to be useful in the treatment of gad, particularly for those participants who had not been on a benzodiazepine. azapirones may not be superior to benzodiazepines and do not appear as acceptable as benzodiazepines. side effects appeared mild and non serious in the azapirone treated group. longer term studies are needed to show that azapirones are effective in treating gad, which is a chronic long-term illness.
the current review provided only limited evidence of the efficacy of treadmill intervention in children up to six years of age. few studies have assessed treadmill interventions in young children using an appropriate control group (which would be usual treatment or no treatment). the available evidence indicates that treadmill intervention may accelerate the development of independent walking in children with down syndrome. further research is needed to confirm this and should also address whether intensive treadmill intervention can accelerate walking onset in young children with cerebral palsy and high risk infants, and whether treadmill intervention has a general effect on gross motor development in the various subgroups of young children at risk for developmental delay.
ldn is associated with less pain compared with open surgery; however, there are equivalent numbers of complications and occurrences of perioperative events that require further intervention. kidneys obtained using ldn procedures were exposed to longer warm ischaemia periods than odn-acquired grafts, although this has not been reported as being associated with short-term consequences.
some chinese medicinal herbs may work in acute pancreatitis. however, because the trials were of low quality, the evidence is too weak to recommend any single herb. rigorously designed, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials are required.
based on the available data, there is little evidence for a differential response to treatment among people with familial and sporadic als/mnd. future randomized controlled trials should document whether people with familial als/mnd are included and the presence or absence of a mutation in an als susceptibility gene amongst those with familial als/mnd.
lay-led self-management education programmes may lead to small, short-term improvements in participants' self-efficacy, self-rated health, cognitive symptom management, and frequency of aerobic exercise. there is currently no evidence to suggest that such programmes improve psychological health, symptoms or health-related quality of life, or that they significantly alter healthcare use. future research on such interventions should explore longer term outcomes, their effect on clinical measures of disease and their potential role in children and adolescents.
the evidence to estimate the likely effects of interventions in pre-licensure education to increase health-worker supply is generally insufficient or unavailable, particularly in lmics. promising innovations from a high-income country include providing financial support to health professional students or introducing mechanisms to identify and encourage potential students and offering support to 'at risk' students. these and other promising interventions should be evaluated in lmic.
many of the drugs considered in trials in this review are no longer used in clinical practice (and this includes the most commonly tested - flavoxate). there is inadequate evidence as to determine whether any of the available druge are better or worse than anticholinergic medications. larger randomised controlled trials in clinical settings are required to further establish the role of these medications in the management of overactive bladder syndrome.
overall, there is limited evidence that a splint worn at night is more effective than no treatment in the short term, but there is insufficient evidence regarding the effectiveness and safety of one splint design or wearing regimen over others, and of splint over other non-surgical interventions for cts. more research is needed on the long-term effects of this intervention for cts.
there was insufficient evidence from comparisons tested within randomised controlled trials to establish the relative effectiveness of different methods of closed reduction used in the treatment of displaced fractures of the distal radius in adults.
these findings do not currently support the use of infant massage with low-risk groups of parents and infants. available evidence is of poor quality, and many studies do not address the biological plausibility of the outcomes being measured, or the mechanisms by which change might be achieved. future research should focus on the impact of infant massage in higher-risk groups (for example, demographically and socially deprived parent-infant dyads), where there may be more potential for change.
amoxycillin appears to be an acceptable alternative therapy for the treatment of genital chlamydial infections in pregnancy when compared with erythromycin. clindamycin and azithromycin may be considered if erythromycin and amoxycillin are contra-indicated or not tolerated. [note: the seven citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is no clear evidence that using drains in patients undergoing thyroid operations significantly improves patient outcomes and drains may be associated with an increased length of hospital stay. the existing evidence is from trials involving patients having goitres without mediastinal extension, normal coagulation indices and the operation not involving any lateral neck dissection for lymphadenectomy.
data suggest that the effectiveness of maois for the treatment of fm symptoms is limited. although we observed a moderate effect size on pain and a small one on tender points, these results should be taken with caution as they are only based on two studies with a small number of patients and inconsistent risk of bias among them.
benefit for physiotherapy was found in most outcomes over the short-term (i.e. < three months), but was only significant for velocity, two- or six-minute walk test, step length, timed up & go, functional reach test, berg balance scale and clinician-rated updrs. most of the observed differences between the treatments were small. however, for some outcomes (e.g. velocity, berg balance scale and updrs), the differences observed were at, or approaching, what are considered minimally clinical important changes. the review illustrates that a wide range of approaches are employed by physiotherapists to treat pd. however, there was no evidence of differences in treatment effect between the different types of physiotherapy interventions being used, though this was based on indirect comparisons. there is a need to develop a consensus menu of 'best-practice' physiotherapy, and to perform large well-designed randomised controlled trials to demonstrate the longer-term efficacy and cost-effectiveness of 'best practice' physiotherapy in pd.
venepuncture, when performed by a skilled phlebotomist, appears to be the method of choice for blood sampling in term neonates. the use of a sweet tasting solution further reduces the pain. further well designed randomised controlled trials should be conducted in settings where several individuals perform the procedures.
the single study included in this review provides very limited evidence to support the effectiveness of one intervention over the other. the authors conclude that local ablative therapies might be useful for the management of liver metastases, but more research is required to further evaluate the effects of these treatment options and their potential role in increasing disease-free survival and in decreasing recurrence rates.
topical quinolone antibiotics can clear aural discharge better than no drug treatment or topical antiseptics; non-quinolone antibiotic effects (without steroids) versus no drug or antiseptics are less clear. studies were also inconclusive regarding any differences between quinolone and non-quinolone antibiotics, although indirect comparisons suggest a benefit of topical quinolones cannot be ruled out. further trials should clarify non-quinolone antibiotic effects, assess longer-term outcomes (for resolution, healing, hearing, or complications) and include further safety assessments, particularly to clarify the risks of ototoxicity and whether quinolones may result in fewer adverse events than other topical treatments.
based on the available results of rcts, there is limited evidence showing that implants with relatively smooth (turned) surfaces are less prone to lose bone due to chronic infection (perimplantitis) than implants with rougher surfaces. on the other hand, there is no evidence showing that any particular type of dental implant has superior long-term success. these findings are based on a few rcts, often at high risk of bias, with few participants and relatively short follow-up periods. more rcts should be conducted, with follow up of at least 5 years including a sufficient number of patients to detect a true difference. such trials should be reported according to the consort recommendations (www.consort-statement.org/).
there is no evidence to advise one particular treatment option over another. the choice should be based on hospital facilities, convenience for the patient, medical staff, costs and drop-out levels. since different time intervals between hcg and iui did not result in different pregnancy rates, a more flexible approach might be allowed.
acts appear at least equivalent to chloroquine at effectively treating the blood stage p. vivax infection. even where chloroquine remains effective this finding may allow for simplified protocols treating all forms of malaria with acts. dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine may provide a longer period of post-treatment prophylaxis than artemether-lumefantrine or artesunate plus amodiaquine, which is likely to be a function of the long elimination half-life of piperaquine. this effect may be clinically important in high transmission settings whether primaquine is also given or not.
paracetamol 1000 mg alone is statistically superior to placebo in the treatment of acute migraine, but the nnt of 12 for pain-free response at two hours is inferior to at of other commonly used analgesics. given the low cost and wide availability of paracetamol, it may be a useful first choice drug for acute migraine in those with contraindications to, or who cannot tolerate, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) or aspirin. the addition of 10 mg metoclopramide gives short-term efficacy equivalent to oral sumatriptan 100 mg. adverse events with paracetamol did not differ from placebo; serious and/or severe adverse events were slightly more common with sumatriptan than with paracetamol plus metoclopramide.
there is currently insufficient evidence to assess the efficacy and safety of magnesium sulphate when administered to women for neuroprotection of the term fetus. as there has been recent evidence for the use of magnesium sulphate for neuroprotection of the preterm fetus, high-quality randomised controlled trials are needed to determine the safety profile and neurological outcomes for the term fetus. strategies to reduce maternal side effects during treatment also require evaluation.
ibuprofen plus paracetamol combinations provided better analgesia than either drug alone (at the same dose), with a smaller chance of needing additional analgesia over about eight hours, and with a smaller chance of experiencing an adverse event.
there is insufficient evidence about long-term benefit to support the use of interventions intended to help smokers reduce but not quit smoked tobacco use. some people who do not wish to quit can be helped to cut down the number of cigarettes smoked and reduce their co levels by using nicotine gum or nicotine inhaler. because the long-term health benefit of a reduction in smoking rate is unclear, but is likely to be small, this application of nrt is more appropriately used as a precursor to quitting.
antidepressants can reduce the frequency and severity of crying or laughing episodes. the effect does not seem specific to one drug or class of drugs. our conclusions must be qualified by several methodological deficiencies in the studies. more reliable data are required before recommendations can be made about the treatment of post-stroke emotionalism.
there is a lack of evidence from randomized controlled trials to make an informed choice of ipc device for preventing venous thromboembolism (vte) following total hip replacement. more research is urgently required, ideally a multicenter, properly designed rct including a sufficient number of participants. clinically relevant outcomes such as mortality, imaging-diagnosed asymptomatic vte and major complications must be considered.
iron supplementation (at 5 mg/kg/day of elemental iron for 16 weeks) appears to be useful in reducing the frequency and severity of breath-holding attacks. supplementation is of particular benefit in children with iron deficiency anaemia, responses correlating with the improvements in haemoglobin values. iron may still be of assistance in children who are not anaemic or who have low, normal haemoglobin levels. further high-quality randomised control trials of iron supplementation to treat breath-holding attacks in children are required.
the inescapable conclusion of this review is the need for further randomised controlled trials. while we recognise that randomisation is considered by some to be unethical or politically unacceptable (both of which are based on the faulty premise that the experimental treatment is superior to the control – this being the point of the trial to begin with), without such evidence, the area will fail to progress. not only could this result in the continued use of ineffective (and potentially harmful) interventions, but it also means that society is lured into a false sense of security in the belief that once the individual has been treated, their risk of reoffending is reduced. current available evidence does not support this belief. future trials should concentrate on minimising risk of bias, maximising quality of reporting and including follow-up for a minimum of five years 'at risk' in the community.
terlipressin may reduce mortality and improve renal function in patients with type 1 hepatorenal syndrome. whether the evidence is strong enough to support the intervention for clinical practice could be debated due to the results of the trial sequential analyses. however, the outcome measures assessed are objective, which reduces the risk of bias.
children in their first episode of ssns should be treated for at least three months with an increase in benefit for up to seven months of treatment. for a baseline risk for relapse following the first episode of 60% with two months of therapy, daily prednisone or prednisolone given for four weeks followed by alternate-day therapy for six months would reduce the number of children relapsing by 33%.
this review suggests that a transparent cap on the end of the colonoscope may give a marginally faster caecal intubation time compared with standard colonoscopy. it also suggests that there is a better polyp detection rate and less pain with the cap. however, the authors feel that further randomised controlled trials in this area would provide more clinically significant information on this adjunct to colonoscopy.
supplementing breast feeds by cup confers no breastfeeding benefit beyond discharge home and delays discharge considerably. there is currently insufficient evidence on which to base recommendations for a tube alone approach to supplementing breast feeds. further research is needed to evaluate a tube alone approach.
studies examining increased police patrol programs were generally consistent in reporting beneficial effects on traffic crashes and fatalities, but study quality and reporting were often poor. methodological limitations included inadequate sample size, dissimilar baseline measures, contamination, and inadequate data analysis. thus existing evidence, although supportive, does not firmly establish whether increased police patrols, implemented with or without other intervention elements, reduce the adverse consequences of alcohol-impaired driving.
data from two large trials do not suggest a beneficial effect of screening by breast self-examination but do suggest increased harm in terms of increased numbers of benign lesions identified and an increased number of biopsies performed. at present, screening by breast self-examination or physical examination cannot be recommended.
based upon systematic review of nine placebo-controlled trials involving 1006 participants, there is "platinum" level evidence that shock wave therapy provides little or no benefit in terms of pain and function in lateral elbow pain. there is "silver" level evidence based upon one trial involving 93 participants that steroid injection may be more effective than eswt.
with the exception of one recent trial, incentives and competitions have not been shown to enhance long-term cessation rates. early success tended to dissipate when the rewards were no longer offered. rewarding participation and compliance in contests and cessation programmes may have potential to deliver higher absolute numbers of quitters. the one trial that achieved sustained success rates beyond the reward schedule concentrated its resources into substantial cash payments for abstinence rather than into running its own smoking cessation programme. such an approach may only be feasible where independently-funded smoking cessation programmes are already available. future research might explore the scale and longevity of possible cash reward schedules, within a variety of smoking populations.
oral diclofenac is an effective single-dose treatment for moderate to severe postoperative pain. significantly more participants experienced at least 50% pain relief over 4 to 6 hours with diclofenac potassium than with diclofenac sodium. there was no significant difference between diclofenac and placebo in the incidence of adverse events.
compared with no ecv attempt, ecv commenced before term reduces non-cephalic births. compared with ecv at term, beginning ecv at between 34 to 35 weeks may have some benefit in terms of decreasing the rate of non-cephalic presentation, and caesarean section. further trials are needed to confirm this finding and to rule out increased rates of preterm birth, or other adverse perinatal outcomes. a large pragmatic trial is ongoing (www.utoronto.ca/miru/eecv2). [note: the six citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
choice of which depot to use must always take into account clinical judgement and the preferences of the recipients of care and their carers. limited trial data suggests, however, that there are real differences between zuclopenthixol decanoate and other depots and these differences largely favour the former. this review highlights the need for good controlled clinical trials to fully address the effects of zuclopenthixol decanoate for those with schizophrenia. future studies should report service utilisation data, as well as satisfaction with care and economic outcomes. duration of such trials should be of a longer duration than the included studies (12 months or more).
the small number of studies which have been done provide no consistent evidence either way that folic acid, with or without vitamin b12, has a beneficial effect on cognitive function of unselected healthy or cognitively impaired older people. in a preliminary study, folic acid was associated with improvement in the response of people with alzheimer's disease to cholinesterase inhibitors. in another, long-term use appeared to improve the cognitive function of healthy older people with high homocysteine levels. more studies are needed on this important issue.
the evidence available from randomised controlled trials suggests that delaying the introduction of progressive enteral feeds beyond four days after birth does not affect the risk of developing nec in very preterm or very low birth weight infants, including growth-restricted infants. delaying the introduction of progressive enteral feeds results in a few days delay in establishing full enteral feeds but the clinical importance of this effect is unclear. the applicability of these findings to extremely preterm or extremely low birth weight is uncertain. further randomised controlled trials in this population may be warranted.
our review demonstrated that there is currently insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of acei or arb in patients with stage 1 to 3 ckd who do not have diabetes mellitus. we have identified an area of significant uncertainty for a group of patients who account for most of those labelled as having ckd.
based upon the currently available evidence in patients with ra, benzodiazepines (diazepam and triazolam) do not appear to be beneficial in improving pain over 24 hours or one week. the non-benzodiazepine agent zopiclone also did not significantly reduce pain over two weeks. however, even short term muscle relaxant use (24 hours to 2 weeks) is associated with significant adverse events, predominantly drowsiness and dizziness.
there is 'gold' level evidence that diacerein has a small, consistent benefit in improvement in pain. further research is necessary to confirm the short and long-term effectiveness and toxicity of diacerein therapy in oa.
methylxanthines increase the chances of successful extubation of preterm infants within one week of age. important neurodevelopmental outcomes are improved by methylxanthine therapy. in any future trials, there is a need to stratify infants by gestational age (a better indicator of immaturity than birth weight). caffeine, with its wider therapeutic margin, would be the better treatment to evaluate against placebo.
based on the two major randomised trials (helas 2006; wash 2004), there is no convincing evidence that oral anticoagulant therapy modifies mortality or vascular events in patients with heart failure and sinus rhythm. although oral anticoagulation is indicated in certain groups of patients with heart failure (for example atrial fibrillation), the data available does not support its routine use in heart failure patients who remain in sinus rhythm. a large randomised trial of warfarin in heart failure patients in sinus rhythm is currently in progress and data from this trial will be a useful addition to this topic.
this ipd meta-analysis provides the best evidence currently available on the role of adjuvant chemotherapy for invasive bladder cancer. however, at present there is insufficient evidence on which to reliably base treatment decisions. these results highlight the urgent need for further research into the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. the results of appropriately sized randomised trials, such as the ongoing eortc-30994 trial are needed before any definitive conclusions can be drawn.
there is insufficient evidence available from randomised controlled trials to determine the relative effectiveness of surgical and conservative treatment for acute injuries of the lateral ligament complex of the ankle. high quality randomised controlled trials of primary surgical repair versus the best available conservative treatment for well-defined injuries are required.
although it appears that caring for extremely small infants in double wall incubators may theoretically result in shorter hospitalization and may have metabolic advantages, this review was unable to find any data in the literature to support or refute this hypothesis. the studies do not provide any evidence that the small decrease in heat loss improves clinical outcome. therefore, the available data is insufficient to directly guide clinical practice.
the efficacy of interferon on exacerbations and disease progression in patients with relapsing remitting ms was modest after one and two years of treatment. interferon administered by the oral route was not effective for prevention of relapses. longer follow-up and more uniform reporting of clinical and mri outcomes among these trials might have allowed for a more convincing conclusion.
given the level of investment in growth monitoring worldwide, it is surprising there is so little research evaluating its potential benefits and harms.
we found no new studies since the last version of this review. ibuprofen is an effective treatment for acute migraine headaches, providing pain relief in about half of sufferers, but complete relief from pain and associated symptoms for only a minority. nnts for all efficacy outcomes were better with 400 mg than 200 mg in comparisons with placebo, and soluble formulations provided more rapid relief. adverse events were mostly mild and transient, occurring at the same rate as with placebo.
there is good evidence that nonoxynol-9 does not protect against sexually transmitted infections, and there is some evidence that it may be harmful by increasing the rate of genital ulceration. as such, this product cannot be recommended for sti prevention.
the included trials did not demonstrate significant differences for most of the outcomes when targeting intensive perioperative glycaemic control compared with conventional glycaemic control in patients with diabetes mellitus. however, posthoc analysis indicated that intensive glycaemic control was associated with an increased number of patients experiencing hypoglycaemic episodes. intensive glycaemic control protocols with near-normal blood glucose targets for patients with diabetes mellitus undergoing surgical procedures are currently not supported by an adequate scientific basis. we suggest that insulin treatment regimens, patient- and health-system relevant outcomes, and time points for outcome measures should be defined in a thorough and uniform way in future studies.
as in an earlier systematic review, we found hydergine to show significant treatment effects when assessed by either global ratings or comprehensive rating scales (based here on a smaller set of trials than in the earlier published systematic review because trials were required to have data that could conform with metaview, the cochrane collaboration statistics software). the small number of trials available for analysis, however, limited the ability of subgroup analyses to identify statistically significant moderating effects. unfortunately, most of the randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled trials of hydergine were conducted and published before the advent of consensus-based diagnostic standards of dementia in 1984; therefore diagnostic criteria were less specific. as a result, uncertainty remains regarding hydergine's efficacy in dementia.
fibreoptic phototherapy has a place in the management of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. it is probably a safe alternative to conventional phototherapy in term infants with physiological jaundice. no trials have been identified which support the widely-held view that fibreoptic devices interfere less with infant care or impact less on parent-child bonding.
oral lornoxicam is effective at treating moderate to severe acute postoperative pain, based on limited data. adverse events did not differ significantly from placebo.
from the available evidence we cannot advocate the use of anticholinergics in ms.
this review has found one trial that does not demonstrate significant differences in clinical outcomes between nurse led care and doctor led care within the setting of a specialist clinic is, but there may be increased cost implications. further research is required to review whether nurse led care provides the same outcomes in the community or secondary care setting.
based on the trials included in this review, there is no evidence to date that any particular drug, or combination of drugs, is more effective in the management of fungal keratitis. the trials included in this review were of variable quality and were generally underpowered.
when considering the trade off between the benefits and harms of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and paracetamol/acetaminophen, it is not known whether one is better than the other for rheumatoid arthritis. but people with rheumatoid arthritis and the researchers in the study did prefer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs more than acetaminophen/paracetamol. there is a need for a large trial, with appropriate randomisation, double-blinding, test of the success of the blinding, and with explicit methods to measure and analyse pain and adverse effects.
considering the small number of patients studied, there is insufficient evidence to support or to refute the use of macrolides in patients with chronic asthma. further studies are needed in particular to clarify the potential role of macrolides in some subgroups of asthmatics such as those with evidence of chronic bacterial infection.
there are no identified rcts investigating the effects of scus on behavioural symptoms in dementia, and no strong evidence of benefit from the available non-rcts. it is probably more important to implement best practice than to provide a specialized care environment. the routine collection of data on behaviour, restraint and psychotropic drug use across multiple nursing home settings offers the best modality for formal evaluation of the benefit or otherwise of scus.
budesonide is more effective than placebo or mesalamine for induction of remission in crohn's disease. although short-term efficacy with budesonide is less than with conventional steroids, particularly in those with severe disease or more extensive colonic involvement, the likelihood of adverse events and adrenal suppression is lower.
implications for practiceprolonged indomethacin course does not appear to have a significant effect on improving important outcomes, such as pda treatment failure, cld, ivh, or mortality. the reduction of transient renal impairment does not outweigh the increased risk of nec associated with the prolonged course. based on these results, a prolonged course of indomethacin cannot be recommended for the routine treatment of pda in preterm infants. implications for researchthere is a paucity of data on optimal dosing and duration of indomethacin therapy for the treatment of pda, in particular for extremely low birth weight infants (elbw) premature infants. it is likely that a single standard indomethacin regime is not the ideal for every premature infant. therefore, individual patient response should be considered and evaluated, in particular in elbw infants. future randomized clinical trials should include this high risk population and investigate the effect of tailoring dose and duration of therapy to individual response in terms of echocardiographic findings and/or prostaglandin levels, focusing on clinically significant outcomes, including long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes. in addition, factors that may influence treatment effect, such as birth weight, gestational age, age at the time of randomization, total fluid intake, feeding practice, and severity of pda, need to be taken into account when designing such studies.
although the basic science is interesting, the evidence for beneficial effect of vinpocetine on patients with dementia is inconclusive and does not support clinical use. the drug seems to have few adverse effects at the doses used in the studies. large studies evaluating the use of vinpocetine for people suffering from well defined types of cognitive impairment are needed to explore possible efficacy of this treatment.
there is currently no evidence to support or refute the use of any specific technique of flushing or reperfusion during liver transplantation. due to the paucity of data, absence of evidence should not be confused with evidence of absence of any differences. further well designed trials with low risk of systematic error and low risk of random errors are necessary.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to draw conclusions on the effectiveness of interventions used to prevent hamstring injuries in people participating in football or other high risk activities for these injuries. the findings for manual therapy need confirmation.
there are insufficient research data on which to base our clinical practice on retention at present. there is an urgent need for high quality randomised controlled trials in this crucial area of orthodontic practice.
this systematic review confirms that amisulpride is an effective 'atypical' antipsychotic drug for those with schizophrenia. amisulpride may offer a good general profile, at least compared to high-potency 'typical' antipsychotics. it may also yield better results in some specific outcomes related to efficacy, such as improvement of global state and general negative symptoms. it might be more acceptable and more tolerable than high-potency conventional antipsychotics, especially regarding extrapyramidal side-effects. longer term randomised trials are needed to evaluate the comparative value of amisulpride, particularly compared to other expensive atypical antipsychotics. these should focus on important outcomes which have not been sufficiently monitored such as service use, family burden and quality of life.
published evidence does not support the use of piracetam in the treatment of people with dementia or cognitive impairment. although effects were found on global impression of change, no benefit was shown by any of the more specific measures of cognitive function. the evidence indicates a need for further evaluation of piracetam.
there are limited data on this important issue and more research is urgently needed.
while ideally future research would focus on direct comparison of standard therapeutic combinations of d4t+3tc+an nnrti and azt+3tc+an nnrti to compare these regimens more directly, it is unlikely that additional trials will be mounted. observational studies should focus on understanding outcomes, including toxicity and tolerability, in low- and middle-income countries.
the addition of one or more drugs to the regimen shows a statistically significant advantage for tumour response in women with metastatic breast cancer but the results suggest no difference in survival time or time to progression. the positive effect on tumour response was also associated with increased toxicity.
the addition of bevacizumab to chemotherapy of metastatic colorectal cancer prolongs both pfs and os in first-and second-line therapy.
there is no clear evidence which favors delayed (when stabilized) as compared with immediate (within 24 hours of birth) timing of surgical repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, but a substantial advantage to either one cannot be ruled out. a large, multicenter randomized trial would be needed to answer this question.
the existing studies provide insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of rapid smoking, or whether there is a dose-response to aversive stimulation. milder versions of aversive smoking seem to lack specific efficacy. rapid smoking is an unproven method with sufficient indications of promise to warrant evaluation using modern rigorous methodology.
we did not find evidence to support the use of any specific type of adjuvant therapy for borderline ovarian tumours. rcts evaluating the benefit of adjuvant therapy with optimally dosed chemotherapy and newer targeted drugs are necessary, particularly for advanced borderline ovarian tumours. the low mortality from borderline ovarian tumours should make recurrence-free survival, time to recurrence and morbidity important end points in such trials. bilateral cystectomy may be offered to women with bilateral borderline ovarian tumours diagnosed intra-operatively who are wishing to preserve their fertility. similarly, women who had rcts comparing radical with conservative surgery and comparing laparoscopy with laparotomy are needed.
people who are overweight or obese benefit from psychological interventions, particularly behavioural and cognitive-behavioural strategies, to enhance weight reduction. they are predominantly useful when combined with dietary and exercise strategies. the bulk of the evidence supports the use of behavioural and cognitive-behavioural strategies. other psychological interventions are less rigorously evaluated for their efficacy as weight loss treatments.
most proposed physiotherapy techniques for rehabilitation of hamstring injuries have not been assessed using randomised trials. those that have only have single studies with a limited range of participants and outcomes. there is limited evidence to suggest that time to recovery for elite athletes can be reduced with an increased daily frequency of hamstring stretching exercises. there is preliminary evidence from another small study of mixed ability athletes to suggest that exercise to correct movement dysfunction could reduce time to return to full activity and the risk of re-injury. further studies are required to check these findings. until further evidence is available, current practice and widely published rehabilitation protocols cannot either be supported or refuted.
music listening may have a beneficial effect on blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, anxiety, and pain in persons with chd. however, the quality of the evidence is not strong and the clinical significance unclear. most studies examined the effects of listening to pre-recorded music. more research is needed on the effects of music offered by a trained music therapist.
several herbal interventions are inadequately justified by single studies or non-comparable studies in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. there is moderate evidence that oils containing gla (evening primrose, borage, or blackcurrant seed oil) afford some benefit in relieving symptoms for ra, while evidence for phytodolor® n is less convincing.tripterygium wilfordii products may reduce some ra symptoms, however, oral use may be associated with several side effects. many trials of herbal therapies are hampered by research design flaws and inadequate reporting. further investigation of each herbal therapy is warranted, particularly via well designed, fully powered, confirmatory clinical trials that use american college of rheumatology improvement criteria to measure outcomes and report results according to consort guidelines.
conclusions about the efficacy of physical training in cystic fibrosis are limited by the small size, short duration and incomplete reporting of most of the studies included in this review. physical training is already part of the care package offered to most people with cystic fibrosis and there is a lack of evidence to actively discourage this. the benefits obtained from including physical training in a package of care may be influenced by the type of training programme. further research is needed to assess comprehensively the benefits of exercise programmes in people with cystic fibrosis and the relative benefits of the addition of aerobic versus anaerobic versus a combination of both types of physical training to the care of people with cystic fibrosis.
only one of the three currently used vaccines has been assessed for efficacy in a rct. other rcts have assessed their safety, however, and they appear to cause only occasional mild or moderate adverse events. further trials of effectiveness and safety are needed for the currently used vaccines, especially concerning dose levels and schedules. trials investigating several new vaccines are planned or in progress.
antibiotic treatment can eradicate bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy. the overall risk of ptb was not significantly reduced. this review provides little evidence that screening and treating all pregnant women with bacterial vaginosis will prevent ptb and its consequences. when screening criteria were broadened to include women with abnormal flora there was a 47% reduction in preterm birth, however this is limited to two included studies.
there is insufficient high quality evidence to confirm any significant difference in outcome between surgical or non-surgical initial management of people following primary patellar dislocation, and none examining this comparison in people with recurrent patellar dislocation. adequately powered randomised, multi-centre controlled trials, conducted and reported to contemporary standards are recommended.
whether clinicians decide to utilise repeat intramuscular doses of vitamin a to prevent chronic lung disease may depend upon the local incidence of this outcome and the value attached to achieving a modest reduction in this outcome, balanced against the lack of other proven benefits and the acceptability of treatment. information on long-term neurodevelopmental status suggests no evidence of either benefit or harm from the intervention.
endothelin receptor antagonists can increase exercise capacity, improve who/nyha functional class, prevent who/nyha functional class deterioration, reduce dyspnoea and improve cardiopulmonary haemodynamic variables in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension with who/nyha functional class ii and iii. however, there was only a trend towards endothelin receptor antagonists reducing mortality in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. efficacy data are strongest in those with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension. the irreversible liver failure caused by sitaxsentan and its withdrawal from global markets emphasise the importance of hepatic monitoring in patients treated with endothelin receptor antagonists.
there is insufficient evidence to support or not support the effectiveness of the reported drugs for the management of pain due to tmd. there is a need for high quality rcts to derive evidence of the effectiveness of pharmacological interventions to treat pain associated with tmd.
research evidence on effectiveness of interventions to prevent delirium is sparse. based on a single study, a programme of proactive geriatric consultation may reduce delirium incidence and severity in patients undergoing surgery for hip fracture. prophylactic low dose haloperidol may reduce severity and duration of delirium episodes and shorten length of hospital admission in hip surgery. further studies of delirium prevention are needed.
compared to preoperative rt alone, preoperative crt enhances pathological response and improves local control in resectable stage ii and iii rectal cancer, but does not benefit disease free or overall survival. the effects of preoperative crt on functional outcome and quality of life are incompletely understood and should be addressed in future trials.
the available evidence is insufficient to determine whether triphasic ocs differ from monophasic ocs in effectiveness, bleeding patterns or discontinuation rates. therefore, we recommend monophasic pills as a first choice for women starting oc use. large, high-quality rcts that compare triphasic and monophasic ocs with identical progestogens are needed to determine whether triphasic pills differ from monophasic ocs. future studies should follow the recommendations of belsey or mishell on recording menstrual bleeding patterns and the consort reporting guidelines.
local corticosteroid injection for carpal tunnel syndrome provides greater clinical improvement in symptoms one month after injection compared to placebo. significant symptom relief beyond one month has not been demonstrated. local corticosteroid injection provides significantly greater clinical improvement than oral corticosteroid for up to three months. local corticosteroid injection does not significantly improve clinical outcome compared to either anti-inflammatory treatment and splinting after eight weeks or helium-neon laser treatment after six months. two local corticosteroid injections do not provide significant added clinical benefit compared to one injection.
manual fetal manipulation has not been shown to reduce the incidence of non-reactive cardiotocography. trials of manual fetal manipulation should take into consideration that there have not been any benefits demonstrated as yet. [note: the two citations in the awaiting classification section may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
urinary incontinence may be improved with the use of local oestrogen treatment. however, there was little evidence from the trials on the period after oestrogen treatment had finished and no information about the long-term effects of this therapy was given. conversely, systemic hormone replacement therapy using conjugated equine oestrogen may worsen incontinence. there were too few data to reliably address other aspects of oestrogen therapy, such as oestrogen type and dose, and no direct evidence comparing routes of administration. the risk of endometrial and breast cancer after long-term use of systemic oestrogen suggests that treatment should be for limited periods, especially in those women with an intact uterus.
compared with placebo, kava extract is an effective symptomatic treatment for anxiety although, at present, the size of the effect seems small. the effect lacks robustness and is based on a relatively small sample. the data available from the reviewed studies suggest that kava is relatively safe for short-term treatment (1 to 24 weeks), although more information is required. rigorous trials with large sample sizes are needed to clarify the existing uncertainties. also, long-term safety studies of kava are required.
for liver transplant recipients, antifungal prophylaxis with fluconazole significantly reduces the incidence of ifis with no definite mortality benefit. given a 10% incidence of ifi, 14 liver transplant recipients would require fluconazole prophylaxis to prevent one infection. in transplant centres where the incidence of ifis is high, or in situations where the individual risk is great, antifungal prophylaxis should be considered.
there is insufficient information available from clinical trials to support the use of mifepristone to induce labour. however, the studies suggest that mifepristone is better than placebo in reducing the likelihood of caesarean sections being performed for failed induction of labour; therefore, this may justify future trials comparing mifepristone with the routine cervical ripening agents currently in use. there is little information on effects on the baby.
we found no evidence that adenosine and verapamil as treatments for no-reflow during ppci can reduce all-cause mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarction or the incidence of angiographic no-reflow (timi flow grade < 3 and mbg 0 to1), but there was some evidence of increased adverse events. further clinical research into adenosine and verapamil is needed because of the limited numbers of included trials and participants.
at present, the data are insufficient to conclude that any of the purported chemoprotective agents (acetylcysteine, amifostine, calcium and magnesium, diethyldithiocarbamate, glutathione, org 2766, oxycarbazepine, or vitamin e) prevent or limit the neurotoxicity of platin drugs among human patients.
there is no evidence to support feeding with a hydrolysed formula for the prevention of allergy compared to exclusive breast feeding. in high risk infants who are unable to be completely breast fed, there is limited evidence that prolonged feeding with a hydrolysed formula compared to a cow's milk formula reduces infant and childhood allergy and infant cma. in view of methodological concerns and inconsistency of findings, further large, well designed trials comparing formulas containing partially hydrolysed whey, or extensively hydrolysed casein to cow's milk formulas are needed.
saline irrigations are well tolerated. although minor side effects are common, the beneficial effect of saline appears to outweigh these drawbacks for the majority of patients. the use of topical saline could be included as a treatment adjunct for the symptoms of chronic rhinosinusitis.
no interventions that have been properly evaluated reduce pain during or after iud insertion. one poorly controlled trial suggested that topical lidocaine gel may reduce insertion-related pain and warrants further investigation.
the use of csf in patients with febrile neutropenia due to cancer chemotherapy does not affect overall mortality, but reduces the amount of time spent in hospital and the neutrophil recovery period. it was not clear whether csf has an effect on infection-related mortality.
there is insufficient high quality research and evidence to enable conclusions to be drawn about the effects of topical interventions on wound healing in people with facial burns.
there is consistent, if limited, evidence that valproate is an efficacious treatment for acute mania. valproate may be less efficacious than olanzapine. more, rigorously designed, trials over the full range of acute affective episodes are required.
our analyses suggest that there is no clinically relevant difference in efficacy or safety between insulin detemir and insulin glargine for targeting hyperglycaemia. however, to achieve the same glycaemic control insulin detemir was often injected twice-daily in a higher dose but with less weight gain, while insulin glargine was injected once-daily, with somewhat fewer injection site reactions.
evidence from our review suggests that interventions to increase the quality of questions formulated in practice produce mixed results at both short- (immediately following intervention), and moderate-term follow up (up to nine months), comparatively. although three studies reported effectiveness estimates of an educational intervention for increasing the quality of question formulation within the short term, only one study examined the effectiveness in the longer term (one year) and revealed that search skills had eroded over time. data suggests that sustainability of effects from educational interventions for question formulation are unknown.
the results show that reducing protein intake appears to slightly slow progression to renal failure but not statistically significantly so. however, questions concerning the level of protein intake and compliance remain. further longer-term research on large representative groups of patients with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus is necessary. because of the variability amongst patients, there might perhaps be a six month therapeutic trial of protein restriction in all individuals, with continuation only in those who responded best. trials are required of different types of protein.
the small to moderate beneficial effects of non-tramadol opioids are outweighed by large increases in the risk of adverse events. non-tramadol opioids should therefore not be routinely used, even if osteoarthritic pain is severe.
from the available evidence, pentoxifylline seems to offer some beneficial effects in renal function improvement and reduction in albuminuria and proteinuria, with no obvious serious adverse effects for patients with dkd. however, most studies were poorly reported, small, and methodologically flawed. evidence to support the use of pentoxifylline for dkd was insufficient to develop recommendations for its use in this patient population. rigorously designed, randomised, multicentre, large scale studies of pentoxifylline for dkd are needed to further assess its therapeutic effects.
this updated cochrane review found no evidence to suggest that homocysteine-lowering interventions in the form of supplements of vitamins b6, b9 or b12 given alone or in combination should be used for preventing cardiovascular events. furthermore, there is no evidence suggesting that homocysteine-lowering interventions are associated with an increased risk of cancer.
mx shows a significant but partial efficacy in reducing the risk of ms progression and the frequency of relapses in patients affected by worsening rrms, prms and spms in the short-term follow-up (two years). no major neoplastic events or symptomatic cardiotoxicity related to mx have been reported; however studies with longer follow-up (not included in this review) have raised concerns about the risk of systolic disfunction (~12%) and therapy-related acute leukaemias (0.8%), which are increasingly reported in the literature. mx should be limited to treating patients with worsening rrms and spms and with evidence of persistent inflammatory activity after a careful assessment of the individual patients’ risk and benefit profiles. assessment should also consider the present availability of alternative therapies with less severe adverse events.
there is currently no evidence to recommend prophylactic antiviral treatment to prevent recurrence of hcv infection either in primary liver transplantation or re-transplantation. further randomised clinical trials with adequate trial methodology and adequate duration of follow-up are necessary.
further research is needed before routine use of prebiotics can be recommended for prevention of allergy in formula fed infants. there is some evidence that a prebiotic supplement added to infant feeds may prevent eczema. it is unclear whether the use of prebiotic should be restricted to infants at high risk of allergy or may have an effect in low risk populations; or whether it may have an effect on other allergic diseases including asthma.
antibiotic treatment is associated with shorter duration of diarrhoea but higher incidence of side-effects. trials generally do not report duration of post-treatment diarrhoea using time-to-event analyses, and should do.
although an increase in clinical pregnancy rate with day three embryo transfer was demonstrated, at present there is not sufficient good quality evidence to suggest an improvement in live birth when embryo transfer is delayed from day two to day three.
at this moment there are not sufficient data to determine which of rfsh or ufsh is preferable for ovulation induction in women with pcos.
the available data suggest that infants who receive iron supplementation have a slightly higher haemoglobin level, improved iron stores and a lower risk of developing iron deficiency anaemia when compared with those who are unsupplemented. however, it is unclear whether iron supplementation in preterm and low birth weight infants has long term benefits in terms of neurodevelopmental outcome and growth. the optimum timing and duration of iron supplementation remains unclear.
available data demonstrate no evidence of the benefit of danazol for unexplained subfertility. although there is insufficient evidence to be certain of this, the need for contraception during treatment and the adverse effects and costs of danazol, make its use for this problem unwarranted. the increased pregnancy rate in the long term follow-up data may be attributable to additional therapies and did not influence the live birth/ongoing pregnancy data.
1. nitrous oxide pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopic abdominal surgery appears to decrease post-operative pain in patients with low anaesthetic risk. 2. helium pneumoperitoneum decreases the cardiopulmonary changes associated with laparoscopic abdominal surgery. however, this did not translate into any clinical benefit over carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum in patients with low anaesthetic risk. 3. the safety of nitrous oxide and helium pneumoperitoneum has yet to be established. more randomized controlled trials on this topic are needed. future trials should include more patients with high anaesthetic risk. furthermore, such trials need to use adequate methods to reduce the risk of bias.
until the results of ongoing studies are available, there is no convincing evidence to support pharmacologic intervention as an effective treatment for memory disorder in ms patients. however, donepezil, ginkgo biloba, memantine and rivastigmine resulted to be safe and well tolerated as adverse events such as nausea, diarrhea, somnolence, and constipation were not frequent, while no serious adverse effects were reported. future high quality randomised controlled trials are needed.
the use of gnrh agonists should be considered in women of reproductive age receiving chemotherapy. intramuscular or subcutaneous gnrh analogues seem to be effective in protecting ovaries during chemotherapy and should be given before or during treatment, although no significant difference in pregnancy rates was seen.
there is no evidence to support the long-term use of oral steroids at doses less than 10-15 mg prednisolone though some evidence that higher doses (≥ 30 mg prednisolone) improve lung function over a short period. potentially harmful adverse effects e.g.. diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis would prevent recommending long-term use at these high doses in most patients.
prophylactic phototherapy helps to maintain a lower serum bilirubin concentration and may have an effect on the rate of exchange transfusion and the risk of neurodevelopmental impairment. however, further well-designed studies are needed to determine the efficacy and safety of prophylactic phototherapy on long-term outcomes including neurodevelopmental outcomes.
there is evidence from one rct that pregabalin does not improve cp/cpps symptoms and causes adverse effects in a large percentage of men. however, research is required to assess further whether pregabalin has a role in patients with cp/cpps for symptom control.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend kinesthetic stimulation as treatment for clinically significant apnea of prematurity. previous reviews have suggested that kinesthetic stimulation is not effective at preventing apnea of prematurity (henderson-smart 2005) and is not as effective as theophylline at treating clinically significant apnea of prematurity (osborn 2005).
cardioselective beta-blockers, given to patients with copd in the identified studies did not produce adverse respiratory effects. given their demonstrated benefit in conditions such as heart failure, coronary artery disease and hypertension, cardioselective beta-blockers should not be routinely withheld from patients with copd.
at best there was 'low level' evidence for the effectiveness of outpatient md rehabilitation in improving active function and impairments following bont for upper limb spasticity in adults with chronic stroke. no trials explored the effect of md rehabilitation on 'passive function' (caring for the affected limb), caregiver burden, or the individual's priority goals for treatment. the optimal types (modalities, therapy approaches, settings) and intensities of therapy for improving activity (active and passive function) in adults and children with post-stroke spasticity, in the short and longer term, are unclear. further research is required to build evidence in this area.
findings from individual randomised trials suggest that music therapy is accepted by people with depression and is associated with improvements in mood. however, the small number and low methodological quality of studies mean that it is not possible to be confident about its effectiveness. high quality trials evaluating the effects of music therapy on depression are required.
this review confirms the absence of evidence for effective agents in the management of cryptosporidiosis. the results indicate that nitaxozanide reduces the load of parasites and may be useful in immunocompetent individuals. due to the seriousness of the potential outcomes of cryptosporidiosis, the use of nitaxozanide should be considered in immunocompromised patients. the absence of effective therapy highlights the need to ensure that infection is avoided. unfortunately, evidence for the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of preventive interventions is also lacking.
up to 12-months treatment with the ocp is associated with an improvement in menstrual pattern and serum androgen levels compared with metformin; but metformin treatment results in a reduction in fasting insulin and lower triglyceride levels than with the ocp. side-effect profiles differ between the two drugs. there is either extremely limited or no data on important clinical outcomes such as the development of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or endometrial cancer. there are no data comparing isds other than metformin (that is rosiglitazone, pioglitazone, and d-chiro-inositol) versus ocps (alone or in combination).
clamp-crush technique is advocated as the method of choice in liver parenchymal transection because it avoids special equipment, whereas the newer methods do not seem to offer any benefit in decreasing the morbidity or transfusion requirement.
there are very few long-term studies to date examining green or black tea for the primary prevention of cvd. the limited evidence suggests that tea has favourable effects on cvd risk factors, but due to the small number of trials contributing to each analysis the results should be treated with some caution and further high quality trials with longer-term follow-up are needed to confirm this.
use of real-time 2-d doppler ultrasound guidance has significant benefits with respect to the number of catheters successfully inserted on the first attempt, reduction in the risk of arterial puncture and haematomas and the time taken for successful vein puncture.
some evidence supports maintaining intravenous fluids rather than restricting them in the first 48 hours in settings with high mortality rates and where patients present late. however, where children present early and mortality rates are lower, there is insufficient evidence to guide practice.
we cannot define the best treatment for cellulitis and most recommendations are made on single trials. there is a need for trials to evaluate the efficacy of oral antibiotics against intravenous antibiotics in the community setting as there are service implications for cost and comfort.
there are only limited data in randomised trials testing the efficacy of vitamin b for treating peripheral neuropathy and the evidence is insufficient to determine whether vitamin b is beneficial or harmful. one small trial in alcoholic peripheral neuropathy reported slightly greater improvement in vibration perception threshold with oral benfotiamine for eight weeks than placebo. in another small study, a higher dose of oral vitamin b complex for four weeks was more efficacious than a lower dose in reducing symptoms and signs. vitamin b administered by various routes for two to eight weeks was less efficacious than alpha-lipoic acid, cilostazol or cytidine triphosphate in short-term improvement of clinical and nerve conduction study outcomes. vitamin b is generally well-tolerated.
at 10 mg per day, both clinically important and statistically significant reductions in vertebral, non-vertebral, hip and wrist fractures were observed for secondary prevention ('gold' level evidence, www.cochranemsk.org). we found no statistically significant results for primary prevention, with the exception of vertebral fractures, for which the reduction was clinically important ('gold' level evidence).
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the routine use of mucolytics for bronchiectasis. high doses of bromhexine coupled with antibiotics may help with sputum production and clearance.
across all as patients, ssz demonstrated some benefit in reducing esr and easing morning stiffness, but no evidence of benefit in physical function, pain, spinal mobility, enthesitis, patient and physician global assessment. patients at early disease stage, with higher level of esr (or active disease) and peripheral arthritis might benefit from ssz.
there is a lack of robust evidence to guide clinical advice regarding the method of birth for twin pregnancies. women should be informed of possible benefits and risks of either approach, including short-term and long-term consequences for both mother and babies. future research should aim to provide unbiased evidence, including long-term outcomes.
low to moderate quality evidence supports the use of specific cervical and scapular stretching and strengthening exercise for chronic neck pain immediately post treatment and intermediate term, and cervicogenic headaches in the long term. low to moderate evidence suggests no benefit for some upper extremity stretching and strengthening exercises or a general exercise program. future trials should consider using an exercise classification system to establish similarity between protocols and adequate sample sizes. factorial trials would help determine the active treatment agent within a treatment regimen where a standardized representation of dosage is essential. standardized reporting of adverse events is needed for balancing the likelihood of treatment benefits over potential harms.
although widely used for treating functional ovarian cysts, combined oral contraceptives appear to be of no benefit. watchful waiting for two or three cycles is appropriate. should cysts persist, surgical management is often indicated.
m. vaccae immunotherapy does not benefit people with tuberculosis. no further trials are warranted and, as a result, the authors do not intend to update this review.
radiotherapy is clearly effective at reducing pain from painful bone metastases. there was no evidence of any difference in efficacy between different fractionation schedules, nor indeed of a dose-response with total dose of radiation. for treatment of generalised bone pain both hemibody irradiation and radioisotopes can reduce the number of painful new sites.
the strength of the evidence relating to this compound is limited, owing to small sample size, poor study design, limited outcomes and incomplete reporting. molindone may be an effective antipsychotic but its adverse effect profile does not differ significantly from that of typical antipsychotics (apart from the event of weight loss). data from this review suggest, at present, there is no evidence to suggest that it may have an atypical profile.
for the treatment of napkin dermatitis there is no evidence to support or refute the use of topical vitamin a preparations. for the prevention of napkin dermatitis there is no evidence to suggest that topical vitamin a alters the development of napkin dermatitis. further rcts are required to determine whether topical vitamin a is efficacious in treating or preventing napkin dermatitis.
this systematic review did not demonstrate any effect of bezafibrate versus no intervention on mortality, liver-related morbidity, adverse events, and pruritus in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. furthermore, we found no significant effects of bezafibrate on mortality, liver-related morbidity, or adverse events when compared with ursodeoxycholic acid, none of the trials assessed quality of life or fatigue. the data seem to indicate a possible positive intervention effect of bezafibrate on some liver biochemistry measures compared with the control group, but the observed effects could be due to systematic errors or random errors. we need more randomised clinical trials on the effects of bezafibrate on primary biliary cirrhosis with low risks of systematic errors and random errors.
there is evidence of an improved clinical pregnancy rate with the use of adherence compounds in art cycles but no evidence of an effect on live birth rate. the increase in multiple pregnancy rate may be the result of the use of a combination of an adherence compound and a policy of transferring more than one embryo. further studies of adherence compounds with single embryo transfer need to be undertaken.
the limited data available suggest that rectal 5-asa is effective and safe for maintenance of remission of mild to moderately active distal uc. well designed randomized trials are needed to establish the optimal dosing regimen for rectal 5-asa, to compare rectal 5-asa with rectal corticosteroids and to identify subgroups of patients who are more or less responsive to specific rectal 5-asa regimens. the combination of oral and rectal 5-asa appears to be more effective than either oral or rectal monotherapy for induction of remission. the efficacy of combination therapy for maintenance of remission has not been assessed and could be evaluated in future trials.
a standardized preparation of pygeum africanum may be a useful treatment option for men with lower urinary symptoms consistent with benign prostatic hyperplasia. however, the reviewed studies were small in size, were of short duration, used varied doses and preparations and rarely reported outcomes using standardized validated measures of efficacy. additional placebo-controlled trials are needed as well as studies that compare pygeum africanum to active controls that have been convincingly demonstrated to have beneficial effects on lower urinary tract symptoms related to bph. these trials should be of sufficient size and duration to detect important differences in clinically relevant endpoints and use standardized urologic symptom scale scores.
cabergoline produces similar benefits to bromocriptine in off time reduction, motor impairment and disability ratings, and levodopa dose reduction over the first three months of therapy. dyskinesia and confusion were increased with cabergoline but otherwise the frequency of adverse events and withdrawals from treatment were similar with the two agonists.
our review highlights that discordance exists between studies examining blinded versus unblinded risk of bias assessments at the systematic review level. the best approach to risk of bias assessment remains unclear, however, given the increased time and resources required to conceal reports effectively, it may not be necessary for risk of bias assessments to be conducted under blinded conditions in a systematic review.
pregnant women need the support of caring family members, friends, and health professionals. while programs which offer additional support during pregnancy are unlikely to prevent the pregnancy from resulting in a low birthweight or preterm baby, they may be helpful in reducing the likelihood of antenatal hospital admission and caesarean birth.
there is "silver" level evidence that arthrographic distension with saline and steroid provides short-term benefits in pain, range of movement and function in adhesive capsulitis. it is uncertain whether this is better than alternative interventions.
this review provides no clear evidence of benefit for preoperative showering or bathing with chlorhexidine over other wash products, to reduce surgical site infection. efforts to reduce the incidence of nosocomial surgical site infection should focus on interventions where effect has been demonstrated.
current evidence from four small studies suggests that the use of pentoxifylline as an adjunct to antibiotics in neonatal sepsis decreases mortality without any adverse effects. researchers are encouraged to undertake large well-designed multicenter trials to confirm or refute the effectiveness of pentoxifylline in reducing mortality and adverse outcomes in neonates with suspected or confirmed neonatal sepsis and nec.
we found no reliable evidence in the literature to support the use of diuretics and high volume fluid therapy for people with acute ureteric colic. however, given the potential positive therapeutic impact of fluids and diuretics to facilitate stone passage, the capacity of these interventions warrants further investigation to determine safety and efficacy profiles.
we found a diversity of cap and co-payment policies. poor reporting of the intensity of interventions and differences in setting, populations and interventions made it difficult to make comparisons across studies. cap and co-payment polices can reduce drug use and save plan drug expenditures. however, although insufficient data on health outcomes were available, substantial reductions in the use of life-sustaining drugs or drugs that are important in treating chronic conditions may have adverse effects on health, and as a result increase the use of healthcare services and overall expenditures. direct payments are less likely to cause harm if only non-essential drugs are included or exemptions are built in to ensure that patients receive needed medical care.
treatment does not improve clinical outcome because the benefit is offset by an increase in poor outcome caused by cerebral ischaemia as a result of treatment with antifibrinolytics. these data do not support the routine use of antifibrinolytic drugs in the treatment of patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
currently available evidence from rcts is insufficient to make evidence-based recommendations for the choice of antibiotic to be used for the treatment of cap in ambulatory patients. pooling of study data was limited by the very low number of studies assessing the same antibiotic pairs. individual study results do not reveal significant differences in efficacy between various antibiotics and antibiotic groups. multi-drug comparisons using similar administration schedules are needed to provide the evidence necessary for practice recommendations.
there is no robust evidence that tt promotes healing of acute wounds.
there is low to moderate-level evidence that compared with no treatment and standard therapy, acupuncture improves pain and stiffness in people with fibromyalgia. there is moderate-level evidence that the effect of acupuncture does not differ from sham acupuncture in reducing pain or fatigue, or improving sleep or global well-being. ea is probably better than ma for pain and stiffness reduction and improvement of global well-being, sleep and fatigue. the effect lasts up to one month, but is not maintained at six months follow-up. ma probably does not improve pain or physical functioning. acupuncture appears safe. people with fibromyalgia may consider using ea alone or with exercise and medication. the small sample size, scarcity of studies for each comparison, lack of an ideal sham acupuncture weaken the level of evidence and its clinical implications. larger studies are warranted.
only one study, involving people with charcot-marie-tooth disease, demonstrated a statistically significant positive effect of strength training. no effect of strength training was found in people with either myotonic dystrophy or facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. surgery had no significant effect in children with duchenne muscular dystrophy and night splinting of the ankle had no significant effect in people with charcot-marie-tooth disease. more evidence generated by methodologically sound trials is required.
intramuscular penicillin seemed to be more effective than oral penicillin in preventing rheumatic fever recurrence and streptococcal throat infections. two-weekly or 3-weekly injections appeared to be more effective than 4-weekly injections. however, the evidence is based on poor quality of trials.
in patients undergoing hsct, routine prophylaxis with ivig is not supported. its use may be considered in lpd patients with hypogammaglobulinemia and recurrent infections, for reduction of clinically documented infections.
for people with the common cold, the existing evidence, which has some limitations, suggests that ib is likely to be effective in ameliorating rhinorrhoea. ib had no effect on nasal congestion and its use was associated with more side effects compared to placebo or no treatment although these appeared to be well tolerated and self limiting. there is a need for larger, high-quality trials to determine the effectiveness of ib in relieving common cold symptoms.
pentoxifylline is an effective adjunct to compression bandaging for treating venous ulcers and may be effective in the absence of compression. the majority of adverse effects were gastrointestinal disturbances.
this systematic review suggests a favourable effect of glycerol treatment on short term survival in patients with probable or definite ischaemic stroke but the confidence intervals were wide and the magnitude of the treatment effect may be only minimal. due to the relatively small number of patients, and that the trials were performed in the pre-ct era, the results must be interpreted cautiously. the lack of evidence of benefit in long term survival does not support the routine or selective use of glycerol treatment in patients with acute stroke.
endometrial thinning prior to hysteroscopic surgery in the early proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle for menorrhagia improves both the operating conditions for the surgeon and short term post-operative outcome. gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues produce slightly more consistent endometrial thinning than danazol, though both agents produce satisfactory results. the effect of these agents on longer term post-operative outcomes such as amenorrhoea and the need for further surgical intervention reduces with time.
overall the available evidence does not allow conclusions about the effect of media campaigns on illicit drug use among young people. we conclude that further studies are needed.
the average dose of chlorpromazine given to people with schizophrenia has declined across time, but this has come about by long - and sometimes hard - experience rather than from direction from high-grade trial-based evidence. this progression towards gentler levels of dosing has taken six decades. we hope that, for modern compounds, data from relevant high-grade evaluative studies will be much more swiftly available to guide informed practice.
some well-executed rcts show family interventions may prevent adolescent smoking, but rcts which were less well executed had mostly neutral or negative results. there is thus a need for well-designed and executed rcts in this area.
abdominal wall lift does not seem to offer an advantage over pneumoperitoneum in any of the patient-oriented outcomes for laparoscopic cholecystectomy in patients with low anaesthetic risk. it may increase costs by increasing the operating time. hence it cannot be recommended routinely. the safety of abdominal wall lift is yet to be established. more research on the topic is needed because of the risk of bias in the included trials and because of the risk of type i and type ii random errors because of the few patients included in the trials. such trials ought to include patients at higher anaesthetic risk. furthermore, such trials ought to include blinded assessment of outcome measures.
the current evidence, limited to one study, shows that there is insufficient evidence to determine effect of choosing antibiotics based on combination antimicrobial susceptibility testing compared to choosing antibiotics based on conventional antimicrobial susceptibility testing in the treatment of acute pulmonary exacerbations in people with cf with chronic p. aeruginosa infection. a large international and multicentre trial is needed to further investigate this issue. the only trial included in the review was published in 2005, and we have not identified any relevant trials up to september 2011. we therefore do not plan to update this review until new trials are published, although we will search the group's cystic fibrosis trials register on a two-yearly cycle.
corticosteroids should be routinely used in hiv-negative people with tuberculous meningitis to reduce death and disabling residual neurological deficit amongst survivors. however, there is not enough evidence to support or refute a similar conclusion for those who are hiv positive.
aripiprazole differs little from typical antipsychotic drugs with respect to efficacy, however it presents significant advantages in terms of tolerability. clearly reported pragmatic short, medium and long term randomised controlled trials are required to replicate and validate these findings and determine the position of aripiprazole in everyday clinical practice.
topiramate has efficacy as an add-on treatment for drug-resistant partial epilepsy. however, trials reviewed were of relatively short duration, and provide no evidence for the long-term efficacy of topiramate. results cannot be extrapolated to monotherapy or treating other epilepsy types.
we failed to confirm the hypothesis that sti control is an effective hiv prevention strategy. improved sti treatment services were shown in one study to reduce hiv incidence in an environment characterised by an emerging hiv epidemic (low and slowly rising prevalence), where sti treatment services were poor and where stis were highly prevalent; incidence was not reduced in two other settings. there is no evidence for substantial benefit from a presumptive treatment intervention for all community members. there are, however, other compelling reasons why sti treatment services should be strengthened, and the available evidence suggests that when an intervention is accepted it can substantially improve quality of services provided.
overall, the evidence from the three included studies is weak, as results are disparate and neither safety nor patient outcomes have been examined. there is insufficient evidence upon which to draw conclusions for practice or policy regarding the effectiveness and safety of care provided to non-urgent patients by gps versus eps in the ed to mitigate problems of overcrowding, wait-times and patient flow.
the included trials were small, with methodological weaknesses and a number failed to give appropriate detail regarding numbers of children assessed. in spite of these methodological weaknesses and the clinical heterogeneity, the consistency and magnitude of the effects reported provides some evidence that cognitive behavioural therapy may be a useful intervention for children with recurrent abdominal pain although most children, particularly in primary care, will improve with reassurance and time.
our review does not support routine use of arv tdm in arv-naive or -experienced patients on either boosted pi or nnrti art regimens. tdm in treatment-naive participants on a pi-based art regimen, particularly if unboosted by ritonavir, may improve virological outcomes. trials were underpowered with small sample sizes, short durations of follow-up and generally poor uptake of tdm recommendations. as these trials were conducted in higher income earning countries, results may not be generalisable to resource-limited countries where the burden of hiv is heaviest.
psychological and pharmacological interventions have a moderate and clinically significant effect on depression outcomes in diabetes patients. glycaemic control improved moderately in pharmacological trials, while the evidence is inconclusive for psychological interventions. adherence to diabetic treatment regimens, diabetes complications, death from any cause, health economics and qol have not been investigated sufficiently. overall, the evidence is sparse and inconclusive due to several low-quality trials with substantial risk of bias and the heterogeneity of examined populations and interventions.
although antibiotics were effective in eliminating b. pertussis, they did not alter the subsequent clinical course of the illness. there is insufficient evidence to determine the benefits of prophylactic treatment of pertussis contacts.
specific treatment including dietary advice and insulin for mild gdm reduces the risk of maternal and perinatal morbidity. however, it is associated with higher risk of labour induction. more research is needed to assess the impact of different types of intensive treatment, including oral drugs and insulin, on individual short- and long-term infant outcomes. [note: the 29 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
in patients with chronic periodontitis in moderately deep pockets slightly more favourable outcomes for pocket reduction and gain in probing attachment were found following fmd compared to control. however, these additional improvements were only modest and there was only a very limited number of studies available for comparison, thus limiting general conclusions about the clinical benefit of full-mouth disinfection.
plasma derived vaccines are more effective than placebo in achieving hepatitis b antibodies, while no statistically significant difference was found between recombinant and plasma vaccines. no statistically significant difference of effectiveness was observed between a reinforced vaccination series versus routine vaccinations of three inoculations of recombinant vaccine.
there is fair evidence that the prophylactic administration of xylitol among healthy children attending day care centres reduces the occurrence of aom by 25%. this meta-analysis is limited since the data arise from a small number of studies, mainly from the same research group.
prophylactic intramuscular or intravenous injections of ergot alkaloids are effective in reducing blood loss, postpartum haemorrhage and the use of therapeutic uterotonics, but adverse effects include elevated blood pressure and pain after birth requiring analgesia, particularly with the intravenous route of administration.
aerobic exercise appears to be safe and may be beneficial for adults living with hiv. these findings are limited by the small sample sizes and large withdrawal rates described in the studies. future research would benefit from participant follow-up and intention-to-treat analysis. further research is required to determine the optimal parameters in which aerobic exercise may be most beneficial for adults living with hiv.
there is no evidence from randomized controlled trials to support or refute the use of partial liquid ventilation in adults with ali or ards; adequately powered, high quality randomized controlled trials are still needed to assess its efficacy. clinically relevant outcome measures should be assessed (especially mortality at discharge and later, duration of respiratory support and hospital stay, and long term cognitive and quality of life outcomes) and the studies should be published in full.
ideally, large, multi-centre supporting trials are needed as outcomes were incompletely reported in included trials in this review. it may be beneficial to design a multi-arm trial comparing 3, 24 and 96 hour infusions or maybe looking at different schedules. in the absence of such trials, the decision to offer short or long infusions in advanced adenocarcinoma may need to be individualised, although it certainly appears that women have less toxicity, apart from sensory nerve damage, with a shorter infusion. efficacy appearing similar regardless of infusion duration.
despite the very large number of patients receiving this intervention, there is insufficient evidence to suggest that enteral tube feeding is beneficial in patients with advanced dementia. data are lacking on the adverse effects of this intervention.
attempting cephalic version at term reduces the chance of non-cephalic births and caesarean section. there is not enough evidence from randomised trials to assess complications of external cephalic version at term. large observational studies suggest that complications are rare.
the pooled trials have inadequate power to detect increases in rare outcomes, such as infant and maternal mortality or readmissions. policies of earlier postnatal discharge of healthy mothers and term infants do not appear to have adverse effects on breastfeeding or maternal depression when accompanied by a policy of offering women at least one nurse-midwife home visit post discharge. large well-designed trials of early discharge programs incorporating process evaluation to assess the uptake of co-interventions, and using standardized approaches to outcome assessment are needed.
in a single fresh ivf cycle, set is associated with a lower lbr than det. however there is no significant difference in clbr following set+ 1fzet and the lbr following a single cycle of det. mpr are lowered following set compared with other transfer policies. there are insufficient data on the outcome of two versus three and four embryo transfer policies.
there is some evidence suggesting that 2 g of amoxicillin given orally 1 hour preoperatively significantly reduce failures of dental implants placed in ordinary conditions. no significant adverse events were reported. it might be sensible to suggest the use of a single dose of 2 g prophylactic amoxicillin prior to dental implant placement. it is still unknown whether postoperative antibiotics are beneficial, and which is the most effective antibiotic.
the evidence suggests that artemisinin drugs are effective and safe for treating uncomplicated malaria. there is no evidence from randomised trials that one artemisinin derivative is better than the others. in areas where there is mefloquine resistance, combination therapy with an artemisinin derivative appears to improve sustained parasite clearance compared with either drug alone. this review summarizes trials up to 1999. for the reasons in the 'what's new' section, this review will no longer be updated.
the available evidence is insufficient to determine whether quadriphasic differ from monophasic oral contraceptives in contraceptive effectiveness, bleeding pattern, minor side effects and acceptability. studies that compare quadriphasic and monophasic oral contraceptives with an identical progestogen and estrogen type are needed to determine whether the quadriphasic approach differs from the monophasic approach. studies that compare quadriphasic pills with monophasic pills containing 30 μg ethinylestradiol are indicated to determine whether quadriphasic oral contraceptives have an advantage over the current, first choice oral contraceptive. until then, we recommend monophasic pills containing 30 μg estrogen as the first choice for women starting oral contraceptive use.
sham-controlled rcts have found no benefits of acupuncture relative to a credible sham acupuncture control for ibs symptom severity or ibs-related quality of life. in comparative effectiveness chinese trials, patients reported greater benefits from acupuncture than from two antispasmodic drugs (pinaverium bromide and trimebutine maleate), both of which have been shown to provide a modest benefit for ibs. future trials may help clarify whether or not these reportedly greater benefits of acupuncture relative to pharmacological therapies are due entirely to patients’ preferences for acupuncture or greater expectations of improvement on acupuncture relative to drug therapy.
despite the limited amount of clinical research available, it appears that hbo therapy in irradiated patients requiring dental implants may not offer any appreciable clinical benefits. there is a definite need for more rcts to ascertain the effectiveness of hbo in irradiated patients requiring dental implants. these trials ought to be of a high quality and reported as recommended by the consort statement (www.consort-statement.org/). each clinical centre may have limited numbers of patients and it is likely that trials will need to be multicentred.
there was only low quality evidence for which are the most effective interventions for maintaining or recovering health of peri-implant soft tissues. the included rcts had short follow-up periods and few subjects and although overall the risk of bias of the studies was either low or unclear, only single trials were available for each outcome. there was no reliable evidence as to which regimens are most effective for long term maintenance. this should not be interpreted as meaning that current maintenance regimens are ineffective. there was weak evidence that antibacterial mouthrinses are effective in reducing plaque and marginal bleeding around implants. more rcts should be conducted in this area. in particular, there is a definite need for trials powered to find possible differences, using primary outcome measures and with much longer follow up. such trials should be reported according to the consort guidelines (www.consort-statement.org/).
for patients suffering from non-seasonal depression, light therapy offers modest though promising antidepressive efficacy, especially when administered during the first week of treatment, in the morning, and as an adjunctive treatment to sleep deprivation responders. hypomania as a potential adverse effect needs to be considered. due to limited data and heterogeneity of studies these results need to be interpreted with caution.
the replacement of rifampicin by rifabutin for first-line treatment of tuberculosis is not supported by the current evidence. hiv-positive people with tuberculosis, the group most likely to benefit from the rifabutin use, are under-represented in trials to date, and further trials in this group would be useful.
the one small rct we found showed that allergen-specific peanut oit can result in desensitisation in children, and that this is associated with evidence of underlying immune-modulation. however, this treatment approach was associated with a substantial risk of adverse events, although the majority of these were mild. in view of the risk of adverse events and the lack of evidence of long-term benefits, allergen-specific peanut oit cannot currently be recommended as a treatment for the management of patients with ige-mediated peanut allergy. larger rcts are needed to investigate the acceptability, long-term effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of safer treatment regimens, particularly in relation to the induction of clinical and immunological tolerance.
planned caesarean section compared with planned vaginal birth reduced perinatal or neonatal death or serious neonatal morbidity, at the expense of somewhat increased maternal morbidity. the option of external cephalic version is dealt with in separate reviews. the data from this review cannot be generalised to settings where caesarean section is not readily available, or to methods of breech delivery that differ materially from the clinical delivery protocols used in the trials reviewed. the review will help to inform individualised decision-making regarding breech delivery. research on strategies to improve the safety of breech delivery is needed.
this meta-analysis of studies supports the use of taxane containing adjuvant chemotherapy regimens with improvement of overall survival and disease-free survival for women with operable early breast cancer. the review did not identify a subgroup of patients where taxane containing treatment may have been more or less effective. dosage and scheduling of the taxane drug is not clearly defined and we await results of the next generation of studies to determine the optimal use of taxanes in early breast cancer.
although the use of growth hormone in poor responders has been found to show a significant improvement in live birth rates, we were unable to identify which sub-group of poor responders would benefit the most from adjuvant growth hormone. the result needs to be interpreted with caution, the included trials were few in number and small sample size. therefore, before recommending growth hormone adjuvant in in-vitro fertilisation further research is necessary to fully define its role.
the available evidence from randomised controlled trials shows significant benefit from treating bell's palsy with corticosteroids.
these trials varied greatly in the types of participants and interventions to communicate contraceptive effectiveness. therefore, we cannot say overall what would help consumers choose an appropriate contraceptive method. for presenting pregnancy risk data, one trial showed that effectiveness categories were better than pregnancy numbers. in another trial, audiovisual aids worked better than the usual oral presentation. strategies should be tested in clinical settings and measured for their effect on contraceptive choice. more detailed reporting of intervention content would help in interpreting results. reports could also include whether the instruments used to assess knowledge or attitudes were tested for validity or reliability. follow-up should be incorporated to assess retention of knowledge over time. the overall quality of evidence was considered to be low for this review, given that five of the seven studies provided low or very low quality evidence.
there is 'gold' level evidence that ad has no benefit for undiscriminated oa (mechanical or inflammatory causes).
the limited number of patients available for analysis, methodological flaws and a significant over-representation of patients with figo stage iiib prohibit drawing definite conclusions regarding the impact of adding hyperthermia to standard radiotherapy. however, available data do suggest that the addition of hyperthermia improves local tumour control and overall survival in patients with locally advanced cervix carcinoma without affecting treatment related grade 3 to 4 acute or late toxicity.
the number of trials and participants is insufficient to draw final conclusions. a large multicenter study with adequate power is needed.
ras may be beneficial for gait improvement in people with stroke. these results are encouraging, but more rcts are needed before recommendations can be made for clinical practice. more research is needed to examine the effects of music therapy on other outcomes in people with abi.
there was weak evidence to suggest that use of an adrenergic agonist was better than placebo treatment. there was not enough evidence to assess the effects of adrenergic agonists when compared to or combined with other treatments. further larger trials are needed to identify when adrenergics may be useful. patients using adrenergic agonists may suffer from minor side effects, which sometimes cause them to stop treatment. rare but serious side effects, such as cardiac arrhythmias and hypertension, have been reported.
our overall knowledge of the most effective antiemetics to prevent chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in childhood is incomplete. future research should be undertaken in consultation with children, young people and families that have experienced chemotherapy and should make use of validated, age-appropriate measures. this review suggests that 5-ht3 antagonists with dexamethasone added are effective in patients who are to receive highly emetogenic chemotherapy although the risk-benefit profile of additional steroid remains uncertain.
in patients with elevated blood pressure, orlistat and sibutramine reduced body weight to a similar degree. in the same trials, orlistat reduced blood pressure and sibutramine increased blood pressure. no trials investigating rimonabant in people with elevated blood pressure could be included. long-term trials assessing the effect of orlistat, sibutramine and rimonabant on mortality and morbidity are lacking. rimonabant and sibutramine have been withdrawn from the market for the time being.
the available evidence suggests an added value of heroin prescribed alongside flexible doses of methadone for long-term, treatment refractory, opioid users, to reach a decrease in the use of illicit substances, involvement in criminal activity and incarceration, a possible reduction in mortaliity; and an increase in retention in treatment. due to the higher rate of serious adverse events, heroin prescription should remain a treatment for people who are currently or have in the past failed maintenance treatment, and it should be provided in clinical settings where proper follow-up is ensured.
this review provides evidence that multiple injection techniques using nerve stimulation for axillary plexus block produce more effective anaesthesia than either double or single injection techniques. however, there was insufficient evidence for a significant difference in other outcomes, including safety.
no statistically significant effects of 'early introduction' of lipids on short term nutritional or other clinical outcomes, either benefits or adverse effects, were demonstrated in the studies reviewed. based on the currently available evidence, 'early' initiation of lipids (≤ 5 days after birth) can not be recommended for short term growth or to prevent morbidity and mortality in preterm infants.
higher protein intake (≥ 3.0 g/kg/day but < 4.0 g/kg/day) from formula accelerates weight gain. however, there is limited information regarding the impact of higher formula protein intake on long-term outcomes such as neurodevelopmental abnormalities. the available evidence is not adequate to make specific recommendations regarding the provision of very high protein intake (> 4.0 g/kg/day) from formula in the initial hospital stay or after discharge.
there is insufficient evidence to inform the management of these fractures. early physiotherapy, without immobilisation, may be sufficient for some types of undisplaced fractures. it remains unclear whether surgery, even for specific fracture types, will produce consistently better long term outcomes but it is likely to be associated with a higher risk of surgery-related complications and requirement for further surgery. there is insufficient evidence to establish what is the best method of surgical treatment, either in terms of the use of different categories of surgical intervention (such as plate versus nail fixation, or hemiarthroplasty versus tension-wire fixation) or different methods of performing an intervention in the same category (such as different methods of plate fixation). there is insufficient evidence to say when to start mobilisation after either surgical fixation or hemiarthroplasty.
catgut may increase short-term pain compared with synthetic sutures. there were few differences between standard and rapidly absorbing synthetic sutures but more women needed standard sutures removing. for other materials, there was insufficient evidence to draw conclusions. findings should be interpreted in the context of the related cochrane review on suturing techniques.
no new studies have been found since the last version of this review and the conclusions therefore remain the same. intravenous pain regimens and levobupivacaine may have greater efficacy when compared to control for the management of pain related to femoral sheath removal. however, a definitive study is still required because the clinical difference is small. there is no evidence to support the use of subcutaneous lignocaine. there is insufficient evidence to determine if pain relief influences the rate of complications. one new study has been included as a 'study awaiting assessment' as we await further information from the study authors.
prophylactic cholecystectomy should be offered to patients whose gallbladders remain in-situ after endoscopic sphincterotomy and common bile duct clearance.
there is insufficient evidence to say whether betahistine has any effect on ménière's disease.
there is no demonstrable clinical advantage to the use of bcm versus bicm in patients with arf who require intermittent hemodialysis.
oral steroids improved the chest x-ray and a global score of cxr, symptoms and spirometry over 3-24 months. however, there is little evidence of an improvement in lung function. there are limited data beyond two years to indicate whether oral steroids have any modifying effect on long-term disease progression. oral steroids may be of benefit for patients with stage 2 and 3 disease with moderate to severe or progressive symptoms or cxr changes.
considering the small patient numbers in these trials, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the efficacy of any form of slt over another to treat speech problems in patients with parkinson's disease.
from most of the single reports we found, after intake of nitrates (either nitroglycerin or isosorbide dinitrate), there was a fall in lower oesophageal pressure and improvement of radionuclide esophageal emptying compared to the baseline. from the available evidence, we cannot provide any implications for practice. appropriately designed, parallel group, randomised controlled trials with long term follow-up are needed to determine the effects of nitrates for achalasia.
endometrial ablation techniques offer a less invasive surgical alternative to hysterectomy. the rapid development of a number of new methods of endometrial destruction has made systematic comparisons between methods and with the 'gold standard' first generation techniques difficult. most of the newer techniques are technically easier than hysteroscopy-based methods to perform but technical difficulties with new equipment need to be ironed out. overall, the existing evidence suggests that success rates and complication profiles of newer techniques of ablation compare favourably with hysteroscopic techniques.
patients with stable spines retaining the ability to walk may be treated with radiotherapy. one trial indicates that short course radiotherapy suffices in patients with unfavourable histologies or predicted survival of less than six months. there is some evidence of benefit from decompressive surgery in ambulant patients with poor prognostic factors for radiotherapy; and in non-ambulant patients with a single area of compression, paraplegia < 48 hours, non-radiosensitive tumours and a predicted survival of more than three months. high dose corticosteroids carry a significant risk of serious adverse effects.
the limited evidence available suggests that bladder training may be helpful for the treatment of urinary incontinence, but this conclusion can only be tentative as the trials were of variable quality and of small size with wide confidence intervals around the point estimates of effect. there was also not enough evidence to determine whether bladder training was useful as a supplement to another therapy. definitive research has yet to be conducted.
although the overall estimate of the number of healed ulcers appeared to show a significant effect in favour of flavonoids (both mpff and hr), this result needs to be interpreted cautiously, as most of these trials were poorly reported, and so had an unclear risk of bias for randomisation, allocation concealment, blinding and methods for addressing incomplete outcome data. there was also a possibility of publication bias.
there is insufficient data to either support or refute the use of antioxidant supplements for patients with nafld. it may be advisable to carry out large prospective randomised clinical trials on this topic.
eslicarbazepine acetate reduces seizure frequency when used as an add-on treatment for people with drug-resistant partial epilepsy. the trials included in this review were of short-term duration and focused on adults.
at present, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of cannabis/cannabinoid compounds for people suffering with schizophrenia. this review highlights the need for well designed, conducted and reported clinical trials to address the potential effects of cannabis based compounds for people with schizophrenia.
the continuous suturing techniques for perineal closure, compared with interrupted methods, are associated with less short-term pain, need for analgesia and suture removal. furthermore, there is also some evidence that the continuous techniques used less suture material as compared with the interrupted methods (one packet compared to two or three packets, respectively).
little research has been conducted on when and how to update systematic reviews and the feasibility and efficiency of the identified approaches is uncertain. these shortcomings should be addressed in future research.
only one of the 15 trials offered evidence for exercise aiding smoking cessation at a 12-month follow up. all the other trials were too small to reliably exclude an effect of intervention, or included an exercise intervention which was insufficiently intense to achieve the desired level of exercise. trials are needed with larger sample sizes, sufficiently intense interventions, equal contact control conditions, and measures of exercise adherence and change in physical activity in both exercise and comparison groups.
tinidazole is more effective in reducing clinical failure compared with metronidazole and has fewer associated adverse events. combination drug therapy is more effective in reducing parasitological failure compared with metronidazole alone. however, these results are based on trials with poor methodological quality so there is uncertainty in these conclusions. further trials of the efficacy of antiamoebic drugs, with better methodological quality, are recommended. more accurate tests to detect e. histolytica are needed, particularly in countries where concomitant infection with other bacteria and parasites is common.
the single deepest vertical pocket measurement in the assessment of amniotic fluid volume during fetal surveillance seems a better choice since the use of the amniotic fluid index increases the rate of diagnosis of oligohydramnios and the rate of induction of labor without improvement in peripartum outcomes. a systematic review of the diagnostic accuracy of both methods in detecting decreased amniotic fluid volume is required.
we found very limited evidence of low quality that communicating results of medical investigations by mobile phone messaging may make little or no difference to women's anxiety overall or in women with positive test results, but may reduce anxiety in women with negative test results. however, with only one study included in this review, this evidence is insufficient to inform recommendations at this time. more research is needed on the effectiveness and user evaluation of these interventions. in particular, more research should be conducted into the potential risks and limitations of these interventions.
it is unclear whether low-dose dopamine therapy for pre-eclamptic women with oliguria is worthwhile. it should not be used other than in prospective trials.
the evidence from the trials reported by thilander 1984 and lindner 1989 suggests that removal of premature contacts of the baby teeth is effective in preventing a posterior crossbite from being perpetuated to the mixed dentition and adult teeth. when grinding alone is not effective, using an upper removable expansion plate to expand the top teeth will decrease the risk of a posterior crossbite from being perpetuated to the permanent dentition.the comparisons of treatments made in the trials reported by mossaz-joëlson 1989; schneidman 1990; ingervall 1995; asanza 1997 and sandikçioglu 1997 were inconclusive so recommendations for clinical practice can not be made based on the results of these trials. however, these trials were small and inadequately powered so further studies, with appropriate sample sizes, would be required to assess the relative effectiveness of these interventions.
there is strong evidence that insoles are not effective for the prevention of back pain. the current evidence on insoles as treatment for low-back pain does not allow any conclusions. high quality trials are required for stronger conclusions.
ec/ic bypass surgery in patients with scao disease was neither superior nor inferior to medical care alone. however, most studies included patients irrespective of their cerebral haemodynamics. participation in an ongoing rct, which is restricted to patients with impaired haemodynamics, is recommended as these patients might benefit from bypass surgery.
topotecan appears to have a similar level of effectiveness as paclitaxel and pld, though with different patterns of side effects. larger, well-designed rcts are required in order to define an optimal regime.
there is currently insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of inhaled nsaids in the management of bronchiectasis in adults or children. one small trial reported a reduction in sputum production and improved dyspnoea in adults with chronic lung disease who were treated with inhaled indomethacin, indicating that further studies on the efficacy of nsaids in treating patients with bronchiectasis are warranted.
sufficient evidence exists that pde-5 inhibitors form a care that improves erectile dysfunction in diabetic men.
administration of epidural local anaesthetics to patients undergoing laparotomy reduce gastrointestinal paralysis compared with systemic or epidural opioids, with comparable postoperative pain relief. addition of opioid to epidural local anaesthetic may provide superior postoperative analgesia compared with epidural local anaesthetics alone. the effect of additional epidural opioid on gastrointestinal function is so far unsettled. randomized, controlled trials comparing the effect of combinations of epidural local anaesthetic and opioid with epidural local anaesthetic alone on postoperative gastrointestinal function and pain are warranted.
in patients with asthma or mild copd, there is no evidence of an effect of inhaled corticosteroid at conventional doses given for two or three years on bmd or vertebral fracture. higher doses were associated with biochemical markers of increased bone turnover, but data on bmd and fractures at these doses are not available. there is a need for further, even longer term prospective studies of conventional and high doses of inhaled corticosteroids.
based on the evidence in this review from three western european countries, drug budgets for physicians in private practice can limit drug expenditure by limiting the volume of prescribed drugs, increasing the use of generic drugs or both. since the majority of studies included were found to have serious limitations, these results should be interpreted with care.
there is little evidence from randomised controlled trials of the effects of consumer involvement in healthcare decisions at the population level. the trials included in this review demonstrate that randomised controlled trials are feasible for providing evidence about the effects of involving consumers in these decisions.
bisphosphonates should be considered for patients with metastatic prostate cancer for the treatment of refractory bone pain and prevention of skeletal events. more research is needed to guide the choice of bisphosphonates, optimal treatment schedule as well as cost-benefit comparisons. combining results from different studies is difficult because different tools were used to assess pain, and also, bisphosphonates vary considerably in potency. this review highlights the need for standardisation and co-ordination among researchers in cancer pain studies.
overall, intervention results in a significant increase in the proportion of patients with a favourable outcome, despite a significant increase in intracranial haemorrhage. further trials are needed to confirm or refute these findings and, given the cost and practical difficulties, to establish whether percutaneous techniques are feasible and cost effective in wider clinical practice.
there is a recognised place for forceps and all types of ventouse in clinical practice. the role of operator training with any choice of instrument must be emphasised. the increasing risks of failed delivery with the chosen instrument from forceps to metal cup to hand-held to soft cup vacuum, and trade-offs between risks of maternal and neonatal trauma identified in this review need to be considered when choosing an instrument.
there is not enough evidence from good quality randomised controlled trials to support or refute the use and type of disposable napkins for the prevention of napkin dermatitis in infants.
the results provide no strong evidence of benefit in using emt to treat pressure ulcers. however, the possibility of a beneficial or harmful effect cannot be ruled out because there were only two included trials, both with methodological limitations and small numbers of participants. further research is recommended.
cervical preparation with osmotic dilators and/or misoprostol before second-trimester d&e is safe and effective. osmotic dilators appear to provide superior cervical dilation when compared to prostaglandins alone or when combined with prostaglandins, however this difference in cervical dilation does not appear to result in differences in procedure time or complication rates. there does not appear to be clear clinical benefit from two days of cervical preparation compared to one-day prior to second-trimester d&e below 19 weeks gestational duration. mifepristone plus misoprostol was associated with high rates of pre-procedural expulsions and does not appear to be a useful method of cervical preparation before second-trimester dilation and evacuation. same-day procedures appear to be a safe and reasonable option in the early second trimester, however, more research is needed to assess the effectiveness and safety of same-day procedures in the later second trimester.
modest weight loss can be achieved with selective pharmacological and non pharmacological interventions. however, interpretation is limited by the small number of studies, small sample size, short study duration and by variability of the interventions themselves, their intensity and duration. future studies adequately powered, with longer treatment duration and rigorous methodology will be needed in further evaluating the efficacy and safety of weight loss interventions for moderating weight gain. at this stage, there is insufficient evidence to support the general use of pharmacological interventions for weight management in people with schizophrenia.
there is no evidence for efficacy of psychological therapy in adult patients with ibd in general. in adolescents, psychological interventions may be beneficial, but the evidence is limited. further evidence is needed to assess the efficacy of these therapies in subgroups identified as being in need of psychological interventions, and to identify what type of therapy may be most useful.
community mental health team management is not inferior to non-team standard care in any important respects and is superior in promoting greater acceptance of treatment. it may also be superior in reducing hospital admission and avoiding death by suicide. the evidence for cmht based care is insubstantial considering the massive impact the drive toward community care has on patients, carers, clinicians and the community at large.
it is not possible to draw any conclusions about the role of immunomodulatory interventions in reducing seizure frequency or the safety of these agents in adults with epilepsy. further randomised controlled trials are needed.
there is limited evidence that in-service neonatal emergency care courses improve health-workers’ practices when caring for a seriously ill newborn although there is some evidence of benefit. rigorous trials evaluating the impact of refresher emergency care training on long-term professional practices are needed. to optimise appropriate policy decisions, studies should aim to collect data on resource use and costs of training implementation.
opinion leaders alone or in combination with other interventions may successfully promote evidence-based practice, but effectiveness varies both within and between studies. these results are based on heterogeneous studies differing in terms of type of intervention, setting, and outcomes measured. in most of the studies the role of the opinion leader was not clearly described, and it is therefore not possible to say what the best way is to optimise the effectiveness of opinion leaders.
there is no evidence for or against antibiotics compared to g(m)-csfs for the prevention of infections in cancer patients.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the use of a policy of planned immediate caesarean delivery for preterm babies. further studies are needed in this area, but recruitment is proving difficult.
current evidence fails to confirm either a clinically important or a statistically significant benefit of bont-a injection for chronic neck pain associated with or without associated cervicogenic headache. likewise, there was no benefit seen for disability and quality of life at four week and six months.
in people with copd, the evidence is equivocal as to whether or not tiotropium offers greater benefit than labas in improving quality of life; however, this is complicated by differences in effect among the laba types. tiotropium was more effective than labas as a group in preventing copd exacerbations and disease-related hospitalisations, although there were no statistical differences between groups in overall hospitalisation rates or mortality during the study periods. there were fewer serious adverse events and study withdrawals recorded with tiotropium compared with labas. symptom improvement and changes in lung function were similar between the treatment groups. given the small number of studies to date, with high levels of heterogeneity among them, one approach may be to give a copd patient a substantial trial of tiotropium, followed by a laba (or vice versa), then to continue prescribing the long-acting bronchodilator that the patient prefers. further studies are needed to compare tiotropium with different labas, which are currently ongoing. the available economic evidence indicates that tiotropium may be cost-effective compared with salmeterol in several specific settings, but there is considerable uncertainty around this finding.
evidence from one randomized controlled trial suggests that a single infusion of infliximab may be effective for induction of remission in crohn's disease. based on this study, we can recommend a dose of 5 mg/kg. there is also some evidence that cdp571 may be effective in inducing remission in crohn's disease. we did not find any evidence that supports the use of etanercept in crohn's disease. the period of follow up for the patients in these studies was probably too short to allow adequate assessment of recently reported serious adverse effects such as tuberculosis and lymphoma.
we have not found evidence that a significant difference exists between phenytoin and valproate for the outcomes examined in this review. results do not apply to absence or myoclonus. no outright evidence was found to support or overthrow current treatment policies.
the joel-cohen incision has advantages compared with the pfannenstiel incision. these are: less fever, pain and analgesic requirements; less blood loss; shorter duration of surgery and hospital stay. these advantages for the mother could be extrapolated to savings for the health system. however, these trials do not provide information on severe or long-term morbidity and mortality.
the melanoma outcomes data collected in this review of rcts of statins and fibrates does not exclude the possibility that these drugs prevent melanoma. there was a 10% and 42% reduction for participants on statins and fibrates, respectively, however these results were not statistically significant. until further evidence is established, limiting exposure to ultraviolet radiation remains the most effective way to reduce the risk of melanoma.
the use of opioid analgesics in the therapeutic diagnosis of patients with aap does not increase the risk of diagnosis error or the risk of error in making decisions regarding treatment.
we found no robust evidence that supplements of any combination of potassium, magnesium or calcium reduce mortality, morbidity or bp in adults. more trials are needed to investigate whether the combination of potassium & magnesium is effective.
in the absence of a meta-analysis, we feel most weight should be placed on the result of the largest trial. the increase in mortality with steroids in this trial suggest that steroids should no longer be routinely used in people with traumatic head injury.
compared to a conservative strategy for ua/nstemi, an invasive strategy is associated with reduced rates of refractory angina and rehospitalization in the shorter term and myocardial infarction in the longer term. however, the invasive strategy is associated with a doubled risk of procedure-related heart attack and increased risk of bleeding and procedural biomarker leaks. available data suggest that an invasive strategy may be particularly useful in those at high risk for recurrent events.
although caution is needed when assessing results from a limited number of small clinical trials there is no current evidence, at the present , supporting the clinical use of antipsychotic medications in the treatment of cocaine dependence. furthermore, most of the included studies did not report useful results on important outcomes such as side effects, use of cocaine during the treatment and craving. aiming to answer the urgent demand of clinicians, patients, families, and the community as a whole for an adequate treatment for cocaine dependence, larger randomised investigations should be designed investigating relevant outcomes and reporting data to allow comparison of results between studies. moreover some efforts should be done also to investigate the efficacy of other type medications, like anticonvulsant, currently used in clinical practice.
six small, poor quality randomised controlled trials provide no robust evidence for use of either agalsidase alfa and beta to treat anderson-fabry disease.
pegaptanib and ranibizumab reduce the risk of visual acuity loss in patients with neovascular amd. ranibizumab causes gains in visual acuity in many eyes. quality of life and cost will be important for treatment decisions. other agents blocking vegf are being tested in ongoing trials.
there is no clear evidence for efficacy of any of the adjuvant and neo-adjuvant protocols reviewed, but there is some evidence to suggest that adjuvant therapy may be beneficial offering prolonged disease-free survival. in order to detect a realistic treatment advantage, larger trials with lower risk of systematic error will have to be conducted.
these limited results suggest that angioplasty may have had a short term benefit, but this may not have been sustained.
although there are shortcomings, there appears to be enough consistency over different outcomes and periods to confirm that thioridazine is an antipsychotic of similar efficacy to other commonly used antipsychotics for people with schizophrenia. its adverse events profile is similar to that of other drugs, but it may have a lower level of extrapyramidal problems and higher level of ecg changes. we would advocate the use of alternative drugs, but if its use in unavoidable, cardiac monitoring is justified.
patients who receive electromechanical-assisted gait training in combination with physiotherapy after stroke are more likely to achieve independent walking than patients receiving gait training without these devices. however, further research should address specific questions, for example what frequency or duration of electromechanical-assisted gait training might be most effective and at what time after stroke. follow-up studies are also needed to find out how long the benefit lasts.
most of the included trials had methodological or reporting weaknesses and were heterogeneous in terms of participants, interventions, outcomes, and settings, so we cannot draw any firm conclusions about the effectiveness of the interventions. all of the evaluated interventions would need further investigation before it was possible to recommend them as effective strategies.
there was a significant reduction in the mean pain score with the use of analgesia during and within 30 minutes after outpatient hysteroscopy.
the type of dressing applied beneath compression has not been shown to affect ulcer healing. for the majority of dressing types there was insufficient data to allow us to draw strong conclusions except for hydrocolloid compared with a low adherent dressing. the result of the meta-analysis indicate no significant difference in healing rates between hydrocolloid dressings and simple, low-adherent dressings when used beneath compression. decisions regarding which dressing to apply should be based on local costs of dressings and practitioner or patient preferences.
although there is a lack of high quality evidence, active management of the third stage reduced the risk of haemorrhage greater than 1000 ml at the time of birth in a population of women at mixed risk of excessive bleeding, but adverse effects were identified. women should be given information on the benefits and harms of both methods to support informed choice. given the concerns about early cord clamping and the potential adverse effects of some uterotonics, it is critical now to look at the individual components of third-stage management. data are also required from low-income countries.
overall this review provides no justification for routinely introducing anticholinergics as part of add-on treatment for patients whose asthma is not well controlled on standard therapies. this does not exclude the possibility that there may be a sub-group of patients who derive some benefit and a trial of treatment in individual patients may still be justified. the role of long term anticholinergics such as tiotropium bromide has yet to be established in patients with asthma and any future trials might draw on the messages derived from this review.
there is no evidence to support the use of any intervention for muscle cramps in als/mnd. more and larger randomised controlled trials evaluating treatments for muscle cramps in als/mnd are needed.
the evidence generated by this review is based on a small number of individuals. furthermore, the effect varies with the methods applied for assessing the sensitivity.thus no clear evidence is available for the support of potassium containing toothpastes for dentine hypersensitivity.
on the basis of this meta-analysis, there is no evidence to support the use of either topical or systemic antifungal treatment in the management of crs.
we found moderate-quality evidence to suggest that the use of arm support with alternative mouse may reduce the incidence of neck/shoulder msds, but not right upper limb msds. moreover, we found moderate-quality evidence to suggest that the incidence of neck/shoulder and right upper limb msds is not reduced when comparing alternative and conventional mouse with and without arm support. however, given there were multiple comparisons made involving a number of interventions and outcomes, high-quality evidence is needed to determine the effectiveness of these interventions clearly. while we found very-low- to low-quality evidence to suggest that other ergonomic interventions do not prevent work-related msds of the upper limb and neck, this was limited by the paucity and heterogeneity of available studies. this review highlights the need for high-quality rcts examining the prevention of msds of the upper limb and neck.
overall this review shows some positive effects of specific methods to improve the involvement of older people in primary care episodes. because the evidence is limited, however, we can not recommend the use of the reviewed interventions in daily practice. there should be a balance between respecting patients' autonomy and stimulating their active participation in health care. face-to-face coaching sessions, whether or not complemented with written materials, may be the way forward. as this is impractical for the whole population, it could be worthwhile to identify a subgroup of older patients who might benefit the most from enhanced involvement, ie. those who want to be involved, but lack the necessary skills. this group could be coached either individually or, more practically, in group sessions.
the existing evidence on the efficacy of cognitive behavioural and behavioural interventions on outwardly directed aggression in children and adults with learning disabilities is scant. there is a paucity of methodologically sound clinical trials. given the impact of such behaviours on the affected individual, his or her carers and on service providers, effective interventions are essential. it is also important to investigate cost efficacy of treatment models against existing treatments. we recommend that randomised controlled trials of sufficient power are carried out using primary outcomes of reduction in outward directed aggression, improvement in quality of life and cost efficacy as measured by standardised scales.
the results are promising for some outcomes (perinatal death, stillbirth and neonatal death). however, most outcomes are reported in only one study. a lack of contrast in training in the intervention and control clusters may have contributed to the null result for stillbirths and an insufficient number of studies may have contributed to the failure to achieve significance for early neonatal deaths. despite the additional studies included in this updated systematic review, there remains insufficient evidence to establish the potential of tba training to improve peri-neonatal mortality.
while a low glycaemic index diet was seen to be beneficial for some outcomes for both mother and child, results from the review were inconclusive. further trials with large sample sizes and longer follow up are required to make more definitive conclusions. no conclusions could be drawn from the high-fibre versus control-diet comparison since the trial involved did not report on many of the outcomes we prespecified.
there is unclear evidence that azithromycin is superior to amoxycillin or amoxyclav in treating acute lrti. in patients with acute bronchitis of a suspected bacterial cause, azithromycin tends to be more effective in terms of lower incidence of treatment failure and adverse events than amoxycillin or amoxyclav. however, most studies were of unclear methodological quality and small sample sizes; future trials of high methodological quality and adequate sizes are needed.
clinicians, researchers, policy makers and recipients of care cannot be confident of the effects of distraction techniques from the findings of this review. the few pioneering studies are small, short and poorly reported. further data from already completed trials might help inform practice, but more trials do seem to be justified as some of these potentially simple techniques, even if their effect is negligible, could be widely implemented and prove more acceptable than other more intrusive treatments.
existing randomized controlled trials, including randomized cross-over trials where the order of the intervention was randomized, comparing nebulizer and mdi for aerosol bronchodilation in mechanically ventilated adult patients do not provide sufficient evidence to support either delivery method at this time.
there is currently insufficient evidence to support the introduction of either g-csf or gm-csf into neonatal practice, either as treatment of established systemic infection to reduce resulting mortality, or as prophylaxis to prevent systemic infection in high risk neonates. no toxicity of csf use was reported in any study included in this review. the limited data suggesting that csf treatment may reduce mortality when systemic infection is accompanied by severe neutropenia should be investigated further in adequately powered trials which recruit sufficient infants infected with organisms associated with a significant mortality risk.
non-invasive ventilation may be a useful adjunct to other airway clearance techniques, particularly in people with cystic fibrosis who have difficulty expectorating sputum. non-invasive ventilation, used in addition to oxygen, may improve gas exchange during sleep to a greater extent than oxygen therapy alone in moderate to severe disease. these benefits of non-invasive ventilation have largely been demonstrated in single treatment sessions with small numbers of participants. the impact of this therapy on pulmonary exacerbations and disease progression remain unclear. there is a need for long-term randomised controlled trials which are adequately powered to determine the clinical effects of non-invasive ventilation in cystic fibrosis airway clearance and exercise.
the features of habit retraining programmes vary. adherence to the protocol appears to be problematic for carers. the evidence from the four reviewed trials is too limited to judge whether or not there are improvements in continence that would make investment in habit-retraining programmes worthwhile.
the vaccine was strongly protective for the first year in children over five and adults, but its efficacy beyond the first year could not be determined with precision. children aged one to five years in low-income countries were also protected but the efficacy in this age group could not be determined. while the vaccine was strongly protective among children aged three months to five years in finland, the efficacy in narrower age strata could not be determined. the sample size was too small to draw conclusions on the effect of booster doses.
studying effectiveness of dhea for sle is difficult, reflecting the problems of studying any treatment for a disease as complex as sle. from the seven rcts to date, there was evidence that dhea had a modest but clinically significant impact on health related quality of life in the short term. impact on disease activity was inconsistent, with dhea showing no benefit over placebo in terms of change in sledai in all but one of the 6 studies reporting this outcome. long term outcomes and safety remain unstudied.
there is no rct evidence demonstrating that anti-hypertensive drugs reduce mortality or morbidity in patients with hypertensive emergencies. furthermore, there is insufficient rct evidence to determine which drug or drug class is most effective in reducing mortality and morbidity. there were some minor differences in the degree of blood pressure lowering when one class of antihypertensive drug is compared to another. however, the clinical significance is unknown. rcts are needed to assess different drug classes to determine initial and longer term mortality and morbidity outcomes.
pooled results from studies using a non-rotta preparation or adequate allocation concealment failed to show benefit in pain and womac function while those studies evaluating the rotta preparation showed that glucosamine was superior to placebo in the treatment of pain and functional impairment resulting from symptomatic oa.
trials assessing the effect of cl have enrolled 469 infants. trends for many outcomes favoured cycled light (cl) compared to near darkness (nd) and cl compared to continuous bright light (cbl) the studies may have lacked significance due to a lack of statistical power. future research should focus on comparing cl to nd.
we found moderate to very low-quality evidence that repairing mould-damaged houses and offices decreases asthma-related symptoms and respiratory infections compared to no intervention in adults. there is very low-quality evidence that although repairing schools did not significantly change respiratory symptoms in staff or children, pupils' visits to physicians due to a common cold were less frequent after remediation of the school. better research, preferably with a crct design and with more validated outcome measures, is needed.
there is limited high quality randomised controlled trial data comparing the relative efficacy of bdp and bud. current guidelines (bts 1997; gina 1995; nhlbi 1997) assume bdp and bud to have equal efficacy, such that for each defined level of asthma severity, the recommended doses bdp and bud are the same. although there is some data to suggest that bud via turbohaler is more effective than bdp via either rotahaler or mdi (with and without spacer), these comparisons are confounded by use of different delivery devices, and are not sufficient to warrant a change in guideline recommendations.
compared with compression alone, combined prophylactic modalities decrease significantly the incidence of venous thromboembolism. compared with pharmacological prophylaxis alone, combined modalities reduce significantly the incidence of dvt but the effect on pe is unknown. the results of the current review support, especially in high-risk patients, the use of combined modalities. more studies on their role in pe prevention, compared with pharmacological prophylaxis alone, are urgently needed.
the combined evidence was not strong enough to say whether written medicines information is effective in changing knowledge, attitudes and behaviours related to medicine taking. there is some evidence that written information can improve knowledge. the trials were generally of poor quality, which reduces confidence in the results. trials examining the effects of written information need to be better designed and use consistent and validated outcome measures. trials should evaluate internet-based medicines information. it is imperative that written medicines information be based on best practice for its information design and content, which could improve its effectiveness in helping people to use medicines appropriately.
the findings of this review suggest several possible benefits for upright posture in women without epidural, but with the possibility of increased risk of blood loss greater than 500 ml. until such time as the benefits and risks of various delivery positions are estimated with greater certainty, when methodologically stringent data from trials are available, women should be allowed to make choices about the birth positions in which they might wish to assume for birth of their babies.
there is very limited evidence on effective interventions promoting the adoption of icts by healthcare professionals. small effects have been reported for interventions targeting the use of electronic databases and digital libraries. the effectiveness of interventions to promote ict adoption in healthcare settings remains uncertain, and more well designed trials are needed.
there is moderate quality evidence that quinine significantly reduces cramp frequency, intensity and cramp days in dosages between 200 and 500 mg/day. there is moderate quality evidence that with use up to 60 days, the incidence of serious adverse events is not significantly greater than for placebo in the identified trials. further research is required on the optimal dose and duration of use, and also on alternative treatments.
the evidence available does not support the use of ganglioside treatment to reduce the death rate in sci patients. no evidence has yet emerged that ganglioside treatment improves recovery or quality of life in survivors.
patients who receive occupational therapy interventions are less likely to deteriorate and are more likely to be independent in their ability to perform personal activities of daily living. however, the exact nature of the occupational therapy intervention to achieve maximum benefit needs to be defined.
existing evidence does not suggest a mortality benefit from oral anticoagulation in patients with cancer while increasing the risk for bleeding.
these findings add to growing evidence that vct can change hiv-related sexual risk behaviors thereby reducing hiv-related risk, and confirming its importance as an hiv prevention strategy. to maximize the effectiveness of vct, more studies should be conducted to understand which modalities and counseling strategies produce significant reductions in risky behaviors and lead to the greatest uptake of vct.
the evidence from the included trials was very limited. only five studies met the inclusion criteria; these were small, of moderate or poor methodological quality, and reported few of the pre-selected outcome measures. this review did not find any evidence that bladder replacement (orthotopic or continent diversion) was better than conduit diversion following cystectomy for cancer. there was no evidence to suggest that bladder reconstruction was better than conduit diversion for benign disease. the clinical significance of data from one small trial suggesting that bladder replacement using an ileal segment compared to using an ileocolonic segment is better in terms of lower rates of nocturnal incontinence is uncertain. the small amount of usable evidence for this review suggests that collaborative multi centre studies should be organised, using random allocation where possible.
there is a lack of evidence from randomised trials to determine whether the routine use of albumin infusion in preterm neonates with low serum albumin reduces mortality or morbidity and no evidence to assess whether albumin infusion is associated with significant side effects. there is a need for good quality, double-blind randomised controlled trials to assess the safety and efficacy of albumin infusions in preterm neonates with low serum albumin.
there is not enough evidence available to support or refute the effectiveness of combined psychological therapy and pharmacotherapy compared to either of these interventions alone. further large randomised controlled trials are urgently required.
the included trials show significantly better outcomes among those tuberculosis patients for which late patient tracers and reminders are used. studies of good quality (large and with rigorous study design) are needed to decide the most effective late patient tracer actions and reminders in different settings. future studies of reminders in chemoprophylaxis and treatment settings would be useful.
for patients who presented with arterial vascular disease, there was no evidence that dipyridamole, in the presence or absence of another antiplatelet drug reduced the risk of vascular death, though it reduces the risk of further vascular events. this benefit was found only in patients presenting after cerebral ischaemia. there was no evidence that dipyridamole alone was more efficacious than aspirin.
there was insufficient evidence from comparisons tested within randomised controlled trials to establish the effects of hbot on ankle sprain or acute knee ligament injury, or on experimentally induced doms. there was some evidence that hbot may increase interim pain in doms. any future use of hbot for these injuries would need to have been preceded by carefully conducted randomised controlled trials which have demonstrated effectiveness.
in the absence of rcts, this review provides evidence from large prospective observational studies that timing of surgery does not show a significant effect on survival.
there is no proven efficacious drug treatment for sma types ii and iii.
since the proportion of missing outcome data compared to the observed outcome data is enough to induce a clinically relevant bias in the intervention effect, the relative efficacy and safety of combined inhalers and tiotropium remains uncertain. further large, long-term randomised controlled trials comparing combination therapy to tiotropium are required, including adequate follow-up of all participants randomised (similar to the procedures undertaken in torch and uplift). additional studies comparing alternative inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist/steroid combination therapies with tiotropium are also required.
chamoca is not recommended for gtn treatment as it is more toxic and not more effective than mac. ema/co is currently the most widely used first-line combination chemotherapy for high-risk gtn, although this regimen has not been rigorously compared to other combinations such as mac or fav in rcts. other regimens may be associated with less acute toxicity than ema/co; however, proper evaluation of these combinations in high-quality rcts that include long-term surveillance for secondary cancers is required. we acknowledge that, given the low incidence of gtn, rcts in this field are difficult to conduct, hence multicentre collaboration is necessary.
while hydroxyurea appears both effective and safe in severely affected ss adults over a two-year period; further studies are required to elucidate its role in other patient groups and for other conditions.
the available evidence suggests that supplementary enteral nutritional may be effective for maintenance of remission in crohn's disease. whilst larger studies are needed to confirm these findings, enteral nutritional supplementation could be considered as an alternative or as an adjunct to maintenance drug therapy in crohn's disease.
the evidence from randomized controlled trials is limited by the variability in study design, stage of cancer and subjects enrolled, interventions utilized, definitions and reporting of outcomes and the lack of psa testing for diagnostic and monitoring purposes. however, the available information suggests that early androgen suppression for treatment of advanced prostate cancer reduces disease progression and complications due to progression. early androgen suppression may provide a small but statistically significant improvement in overall survival at 10 years. there was no statistically significant difference in prostate cancer specific survival but a clinically important difference could not be excluded. these outcomes need to be evaluated with the evidence suggesting higher costs and more frequent treatment related adverse effects with early therapy. additional studies are required to evaluate more definitively the efficacy and adverse effects of early versus delayed androgen suppression in men with prostate cancer. in particular trials should evaluate patients with advanced prostate cancer diagnosed by psa testing and men with persistent or rising psa levels following treatment options (e.g. radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy or observation) for clinically localized disease.
there is moderate-level evidence that abatacept is efficacious and safe in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. abatacept should not be used in combination with other biologics to treat rheumatoid arthritis. the withdrawal and toxicity profile appears acceptable at the present time but further long-term studies and post-marketing surveillance are required to assess harms and sustained efficacy.
studies are insufficient to identify conclusive evidence favouring a policy of elective intravenous antibiotic administration, despite its widespread use, neither are the potential risks adequately evaluated. the results should be viewed with caution, as participant numbers are small. clearly there is a need for a well-designed, adequately-powered, multicentred randomised controlled trial to evaluate these issues. this review will no longer be regularly updated. searches will still be undertaken on a two-yearly basis by the cochrane cystic fibrosis & genetic disorders group. if, in future, relevant trials are identified, the review will be updated again.
there is no evidence to support the use of beta2-agonists in children with acute cough who do not have evidence of airflow obstruction. there is also little evidence that the routine use of beta2-agonists is helpful for adults with acute cough. these agents may reduce symptoms, including cough, in people with evidence of airflow obstruction. however, this potential benefit is not well-supported by the available data and must be weighed against the adverse effects associated with their use.
clozapine may be more effective in reducing symptoms of schizophrenia, producing clinically meaningful improvements and postponing relapse, than typical antipsychotic drugs - but data are weak and prone to bias. participants were more satisfied with clozapine treatment than with typical neuroleptic treatment. the clinical effect of clozapine, however, is, at least in the short-term, not reflected in measures of global functioning such as ability to leave the hospital and maintain an occupation. the short-term benefits of clozapine have to be weighed against the risk of adverse effects. within the context of trials, the potentially dangerous white blood cell decline seems to be more frequent in children and adolescents and in the elderly than in young adults or people of middle age. the existing trials have largely neglected to assess the views of participants and their families on clozapine. more community-based long-term randomised trials are needed to evaluate the efficacy of clozapine on global and social functioning as trials in special groups such as people with learning disabilities.
this review shows that the treatment of patients with copd with salmeterol 50 mcg produces modest increases in lung function. there were varying effects for other important outcomes such as health related quality of life or reduction in symptoms. however, there was a consistent reduction in exacerbations which may help people with copd who suffer frequent deterioration of symptoms prompting healthcare utilisation. the strength of evidence for the use of salmeterol 100 mcg, formoterol 12 mcg, 18 mcg, 24 mcg was insufficient to provide clear indications for practice.
the results of the single randomized controlled trial comparing elective delivery with expectant management at term in pregnant women with insulin-requiring diabetes show that induction of labour reduces the risk of macrosomia. the risk of maternal or neonatal morbidity was not different between groups, but, given the rarity of maternal and neonatal morbidity, the number of women included does not permit to draw firm conclusions. women's views on elective delivery and on prolonged surveillance and treatment with insulin should be assessed in future trials. [note: the one citation in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
ropinirole therapy can reduce levodopa dose but at the expense of increased dyskinetic adverse events. no clear effect on off time reduction was found but this may have been due to the under-powering of the single evaluable trial. inadequate data on motor impairments and disability was collected to assess these outcomes. these conclusions apply to short and medium term treatment, up to 26 weeks. further longer term trials are required, with measurements of effectiveness, and also studies to compare the newer with the older dopamine agonists.
etanercept 25 mg administered subcutaneously twice weekly together with mtx was more efficacious than either etanercept or mtx monotherapy for acr50 and it slowed joint radiographic progression after up to three years of treatment for all participants (responders or not). there was no evidence of a difference in the rates of infections between groups.
our findings suggest that ssris and tcas are of the same efficacy. however, we have found some evidence suggesting that tca related antidepressants and classical tcas have different side effect profiles and are associated with differing withdrawal rates when compared with ssris. the review suggests that classical tcas are associated with a higher withdrawal rate due to side effect experience, although these results must be interpreted with caution due to the heterogeneity of the drugs and patient populations.
at present, there is insufficient evidence to determine whether curative treatment of genital ulcer disease would reduce the risk of hiv acquisition. the very low quality of the evidence implies that the true effect of genital ulcer disease treatment on sexual acquisition of hiv may be substantially different from the effect estimated from currently available data. however, genital ulcer diseases are public health problems in their own right and patients with these conditions should be treated appropriately; whether the treatment reduces the risk of hiv infection or not.
the use of shock absorbing inserts in footwear probably reduces the incidence of stress fractures in military personnel. there is insufficient evidence to determine the best design of such inserts but comfort and tolerability should be considered. rehabilitation after tibial stress fracture may be aided by the use of pneumatic bracing but more evidence is required to confirm this.
risperidone may be more acceptable to those with schizophrenia than older antipsychotics and have marginal benefits in terms of limited clinical improvement. its adverse effect profile may be better than haloperidol. with the addition of more studies to this review, the publication bias evident in previous versions is no longer a significant issue. any marginal benefits this drug may have have to be balanced against its greater cost and increased tendency to cause side effects such as weight gain. recent important longer term data favouring risperidone's effect on relapse needs to be replicated by researchers independently of the manufacturers of the drug.
evidence is insufficient to compare progestin-only pills to each other or to combined oral contraceptives.
evidence for use of lamotrigine as an adjuvant for people with schizophrenia is not robust and large well-designed, conducted and reported real-world randomised trials are needed to determine its place in everyday clinical practice.
based on available data, partly still unpublished, pirfenidone appears to improve progression-free survival and, to a lesser extent, pulmonary function in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. more data are needed on overall survival and quality of life on treatment. from the studies in this review, interferon gamma-1beta has not been shown to affect survival. other agents evaluated in single studies either failed to provide evidence for a benefit or need to be assessed in larger randomised controlled trials.
routine prophylactic adrenaline for polyvalent antivenom known to have high adverse event rates seems sensible, based on this one trial. if clinicians believe local factors do not justify routine adrenaline, then they should test their belief in a randomized trial. antihistamine appears to be of no obvious benefit in preventing acute reactions from antivenoms.
there are few trials assessing the effectiveness of ursodeoxycholic acid. there is insufficient evidence to justify its routine use in cystic fibrosis.
liposomal amphotericin b is significantly more effective than voriconazole for empirical therapy of neutropenic cancer patients and should be preferred. for treatment of aspergillosis, there are no trials that have compared voriconazole with amphotericin b given under optimal conditions.
for the long-term treatment of vte in patients with cancer, lmwh compared to vka reduces venous thromboembolic events but not death. the decision for a patient with cancer and vte to start long-term lmwh versus oral anticoagulation should balance the benefits and downsides and integrate the patient's values and preferences for the important outcomes and alternative management strategies.
there is currently insufficient evidence as to whether the use of microbial sealants reduces the risk of surgical site infection in people undergoing clean surgery and further rigorous rcts are required.
existing randomised trials do not establish whether the administration of hbo to patients with carbon monoxide poisoning reduces the incidence of adverse neurologic outcomes. additional research is needed to better define the role, if any, of hbo in the treatment of patients with carbon monoxide poisoning. this research question is ideally suited to a multi-center randomised controlled trial.
evidence has accumulated to suggest that the reporting of rcts remains sub-optimal. this review updates a previous systematic review of eight evaluations. the findings of this review are similar to those from the original review and demonstrate that, despite the general inadequacies of reporting of rcts, journal endorsement of the consort statement may beneficially influence the completeness of reporting of trials published in medical journals. future prospective studies are needed to explore the influence of the consort statement dependent on the extent of editorial policies to ensure adherence to consort guidance.
no experimental studies unequivocally demonstrated the effectiveness of aa or tsf approaches for reducing alcohol dependence or problems. one large study focused on the prognostic factors associated with interventions that were assumed to be successful rather than on the effectiveness of interventions themselves, so more efficacy studies are needed.
currently, there is insufficient evidence to advocate progestational agents as a tocolytic agents for women presenting with preterm labour.
the only osmotic diuretic to have undergone randomised evaluation is glycerol. data from trials to date have not demonstrated benefit on death, but it may reduce deafness. osmotic diuretics, including glycerol, should not be given to adults and children with bacterial meningitis unless as part of carefully conducted randomised controlled trial.
it was not possible to reach a conclusion on the effectiveness and safety of either bont-a or the pharmaceutical interventions, benztropine and glycopyrrolate. there is insufficient evidence to inform clinical practice on interventions for drooling in children with cp. directions for future research are provided.
this review suggests safe application of preoperative chemotherapy in the treatment of women with early stage breast cancer in order to down-stage surgical requirement, to evaluate chemosensitivity and to facilitate translational research.
treatment of an exacerbation of copd with oral or parenteral corticosteroids significantly reduces treatment failure and the need for additional medical treatment and shortens hospital stay. it increases the rate of improvement in lung function and dyspnoea and the improvement continues during treatment, but there is a significantly increase in the risk of an adverse drug event occurring. the optimal dose and length of treatment regime needs to be better defined.
we found no conclusive evidence of benefit of folic acid supplementation during pregnancy on pregnancy outcomes.
limited but moderate to high quality evidence from randomised controlled trials showed that over days 3,4-diaminopyridine, or for up to 8 weeks ivig, improved muscle strength scores and cmap amplitudes in participants with lambert-eaton myasthenic syndrome. there are insufficient data at present to quantify this effect. other possible treatments have not been tested in randomised controlled trials.
magnesium sulphate, rather than lytic cocktail, for women with eclampsia reduces the rr of maternal death, of further seizures and of serious maternal morbidity (respiratory depression, coma, pneumonia). magnesium sulphate is the anticonvulsant of choice for women with eclampsia; the use of lytic cocktail should be abandoned.
sp plus aq performed better at controlling treatment failure at day 28, but was not as good as sp plus as at reducing gametocyte carriage at day seven. careful consideration of local resistance patterns is required because resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine and amodiaquine are high in many areas. in order to delay development of resistance to artesunate, the combination with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine should only be considered where both drugs are known to be effective. data on adverse events are still lacking.
we found only one eligible study that assessed the effectiveness of male involvement in improving women’s uptake of pmtct services, which only focused on one part of the perinatal pmtct cascade. we urgently need more rigorously designed studies assessing the impact of male engagement interventions on women’s uptake of pmtct services to know if this intervention can contribute to improve uptake of pmtct services and reduce vertical transmission of hiv in children.
no included studies reported our primary outcome measure of interest, validated hand function. there was heterogeneity between the studies, which were of limited quality and size. consequently, no single non-operative treatment regimen for fracture of the neck of the fifth metacarpal can be recommended as superior to another. further research is definitely warranted.
the value of steroids in the treatment of idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss remains unclear since the evidence obtained from randomised controlled trials is contradictory in outcome, in part because the studies are based upon too small a number of patients.
this review could find no definite advantage of hypothermia over normothermia in the incidence of clinical events. hypothermia was associated with a reduced stroke rate, but this is off set by a trend towards an increase in non stroke related perioperative mortality and myocardial damage. there is insufficient data to date to draw any conclusions about the use of mild hypothermia. similarly, there is insufficient data to date to comment on the effect of temperature during cpb on subtle neurological deficits, and further trials are needed in these areas.
the very limited evidence provided by this review was based on a few old studies of a relatively small size, which we categorised as having high to unclear risk of bias. thus, at present, the review does not allow confident decision-making about the use of h2-receptor antagonists for urticaria. although some of these studies have reported a measure of relief of symptoms of urticaria and rather minimal clinical improvement in some of the participants, the evidence was weak and unreliable. we have emphasised the lack of precision and limitations in the reported data where appropriate in this review.
there is no strong evidence that any clinical advantage for patients requiring acute pd for aki when comparing conventional (lactate) with low gdp dialysis solutions (bicarbonate).
anti-staphylococcal antibiotic prophylaxis leads to fewer children having isolates of staphylococcus aureus, when commenced early in infancy and continued up to six years of age. the clinical importance of this finding is uncertain. further research may establish whether the trend towards more children with cf with pseudomonas aeruginosa, after four to six years of prophylaxis, is a chance finding and whether choice of antibiotic or duration of treatment might influence this.
further comparative studies are required to examine the efficacy of immunosuppressive agents for achievement of sustained remission of nephrotic syndrome caused by minimal change disease. studies are also needed to evaluate treatments for adults with steroid-dependent or relapsing disease.
there is inconclusive evidence to support the use of botulinum toxin in the treatment of mps based on data from four studies with a total of 233 participants, which we considered adequate to be included in this review. meta-analyses were not possible due to the heterogeneity between studies. we suggest that in future studies the same methodology to assess pain, a standardised dose of treatment, follow-up of at least four months (to observe the maximum/minimum curve of the drug effect) and appropriate data presentation should be used. more high-quality rcts of botulinum toxin for treating mps need to be conducted before firm conclusions on its effectiveness and safety can be drawn.
based on the currently available evidence, myeloablative therapy seems to be a good treatment option for children with high-risk neuroblastoma. it results in higher survival rates than conventional therapy, although possible higher levels of adverse effects should be kept in mind. a definitive conclusion regarding the effect of myeloablative therapy in different subgroups is not possible. this systematic review only allows a conclusion on the concept of myeloablative therapy; no conclusions can be made regarding the best treatment strategy. future trials on the use of myeloablative therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma should focus on identifying the most optimal induction and/or myeloablative regimen. the best study design to answer these questions is a rct. these rcts should be performed in homogeneous study populations (for example, regarding stage of disease and patient age) and have a long-term follow up. different risk groups should be taken into account.
while there was a tendency to a better overall result in patients receiving multidisciplinary inpatient rehabilitation, these results were not statistically significant. future trials of multidisciplinary rehabilitation should aim to establish both effectiveness and cost effectiveness of multidisciplinary rehabilitation overall, rather than evaluate its components.
there are insufficient data at present to determine whether providing preterm infants with supplemental iodine (to match fetal accretion rates) prevents morbidity and mortality in preterm infants. future randomised controlled trials of iodine supplementation should focus on extremely preterm and extremely low birth weight infants, the group at greatest risk of transient hypothyroxinaemia. these trials should aim to assess the effect of iodine supplementation on clinically important outcomes including respiratory morbidity and longer term neurodevelopment.
these conclusions are based on few trials including few patients, sometimes having short follow-up, and often being judged to be at high risk of bias. various techniques can augment bone horizontally and vertically, but it is unclear which are the most efficient. short implants appear to be a better alternative to vertical bone grafting of resorbed mandibles. complications, especially for vertical augmentation, are common. some bone substitutes could be a preferable alternative to autogenous bone. osteodistraction osteogenesis allows for more vertical bone augmentation than other techniques which on the other hand can allow for horizontal augmentation at the same time. titanium screws may be preferable to resorbable screws to fixate onlay bone grafts.
the use of ml-uvcs in comparison to sl-uvcs in neonates is associated with decrease in the usage of pivs in first week of life, but an increase in catheter malfunctions. as the quality of included randomized studies is poor and the estimates of clinically important complications are imprecise, no firm recommendations can be made regarding the choice of uvc. adequately powered, properly randomized and properly blinded controlled trials are needed that address the effectiveness and safety of ml-uvcs (double and triple lumen) in comparison to sl-uvcs. these studies should also address the impact of type of catheter material.
the evidence of this review suggests that a short course (three days) of antibiotic therapy is as effective as a longer treatment (five days) for non-severe cap in children under five years of age. however, there is a need for more well-designed rcts to support our review findings.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend the routine use of home visits for pregnant or postpartum women with a drug or alcohol problem. further large, high-quality trials are needed.
the two studies included in this review provide evidence that in the us providing health insurance information and application assistance, and handing out application materials in hospital emergency departments can probably both improve insurance coverage of children. further studies evaluating the effectiveness of different outreach strategies for expanding health insurance coverage of children in different countries are needed, with careful attention given to study design.
there is evidence from the 11 randomised controlled trials included in this systematic review (n = 1505 infants) that therapeutic hypothermia is beneficial in term and late preterm newborns with hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy. cooling reduces mortality without increasing major disability in survivors. the benefits of cooling on survival and neurodevelopment outweigh the short-term adverse effects. hypothermia should be instituted in term and late preterm infants with moderate-to-severe hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy if identified before six hours of age. further trials to determine the appropriate techniques of cooling, including refinement of patient selection, duration of cooling and method of providing therapeutic hypothermia, will refine our understanding of this intervention.
heparinization of the fluid infused through an umbilical arterial catheter decreases the likelihood of umbilical arterial catheters occluding. the lowest concentration tested so far (0.25 units/ml) has been shown to be effective. heparinization of flushes without heparinizing the infusate is ineffective. the frequency of aortic thrombosis has not been shown to be affected; however, the confidence intervals for this effect are very wide. the frequency of intraventricular hemorrhage has not been shown to be affected by heparinization of the infusate, but again the confidence intervals are very wide and even a major increase in the incidence of grade 3 and 4 intraventricular hemorrhage would not have been detected.
daily rest, with or without nutrient supplementation, may reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia for women with normal blood pressure, although the reported effect may reflect bias and/or random error rather than a true effect. there is no information about outcomes such as perinatal mortality and morbidity, maternal morbidity, women's views, adverse effects, and costs. current evidence is insufficient to support recommending rest or reduced activity to women for preventing pre-eclampsia and its complications. whether women rest during pregnancy should therefore be a matter of personal choice.
there are insufficient data available to inform practice. a large randomised controlled trial would be required to determine if the use of naso- versus oro-enteric feeding tubes affects feeding, growth and development, and the incidence of adverse events in preterm or low birth weight infants.
there were not enough data to allow comparison of anterior vaginal repair with physical therapy or needle suspension for primary urinary stress incontinence in women. open abdominal retropubic suspension appeared to be better than anterior vaginal repair judged on subjective cure rates in eight trials, even in women who had prolapse in addition to stress incontinence (six trials). the need for repeat incontinence surgery was also less after the abdominal operation. however, there was not enough information about post-operative complications and morbidity.
in children admitted to hospital with diarrhoea, reduced osmolarity ors when compared to who standard ors is associated with fewer unscheduled intravenous fluid infusions, lower stool volume post randomization, and less vomiting. no additional risk of developing hyponatraemia when compared with who standard ors was detected.
the findings of this review support the use of parenting programmes to improve the short-term psychosocial wellbeing of parents. further input may be required to ensure that these results are maintained. more research is needed that explicitly addresses the benefits for fathers, and that examines the comparative effectiveness of different types of programme along with the mechanisms by which such programmes bring about improvements in parental psychosocial functioning.
use of stroke care pathways may be associated with positive and negative effects. since most of the results have been derived from non-randomised studies, they are likely to be influenced by potential biases and confounding factors. there is currently insufficient supporting evidence to justify the routine implementation of care pathways for acute stroke management or stroke rehabilitation.
the current evidence is limited. while the randomised clinical trial identified was considered to be of good quality, it failed to describe important outcomes. it has been demonstrated that enzyme replacement therapy with idursulfase is effective in relation to functional capacity (distance walked in six minutes and forced vital capacity), liver and spleen volumes and urine glycosaminoglycan excretion in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type ii compared with placebo. there is no available evidence in the included study and in the literature on outcomes such as improvement in growth, sleep apnoea, cardiac function, quality of life and mortality. more studies are needed to obtain more information on the long-term effectiveness and safety of enzyme replacement therapy.
itns are highly effective in reducing childhood mortality and morbidity from malaria. widespread access to itns is currently being advocated by roll back malaria, but universal deployment will require major financial, technical, and operational inputs.
peg was associated with a lower probability of intervention failure, suggesting the endoscopic procedure is more effective and safe as compared to ngt. there is no significant difference of mortality rates between comparison groups, and pneumonia irrespective of underlying disease (medical diagnosis). future studies should include previously planned and executed follow-up periods, the gastrostomy technique, and the experience of the professionals to allow more detailed subgroup analysis.
we found no evidence of benefit when synthetic membranes were compared with cellulose/modified cellulose membranes in terms of reduced mortality no reduction in dialysis-related adverse symptoms. despite the relatively large number of rcts undertaken in this area none of the included studies reported any measures of quality of life.
in this review we considered the risk of bias too high because of the poor quality of the retrieved information (small sample size, heterogeneity of comparisons, flaws in the design, conduct and analysis). although clinical guidelines recommend a second antipsychotic in addition to clozapine in partially responsive patients with schizophrenia, the present systematic review was not able to show if any particular combination strategy was superior to the others. new, properly conducted, randomised controlled trials independent from the pharmaceutical industry need to recruit many more patients to give a reliable estimate of effect or of no effect of antipsychotics as combination treatment with clozapine in patients who do not have an optimal response to clozapine monotherapy.
different approaches to assessing and reporting pruritus precluded pooling of trials comparing the effects of udca versus placebo on pruritus, but examination of individual trials suggests that udca significantly improves pruritus, albeit by a small amount. fewer instances of fetal distress/asphyxial events were seen in the udca groups when compared with placebo but the difference was not statistically significant. large trials of udca to determine fetal benefits or risks are needed. a single trial was too small to rule in or out a clinically important effect of early term delivery on caesarean section. there is insufficient evidence to indicate that same, guar gum, activated charcoal, dexamethasone, cholestyramine, salvia, yinchenghao decoction (ychd), danxioling and yiganling, or yiganling alone or in combination are effective in treating women with cholestasis of pregnancy.
there is insufficient evidence of high quality that supports a policy of bed rest in order to prevent miscarriage in women with confirmed fetal viability and vaginal bleeding in first half of pregnancy.
vitamin d supplementation in a single or continued dose during pregnancy increases serum vitamin d concentrations as measured by 25-hydroxyvitamin d at term. the clinical significance of this finding and the potential use of this intervention as a part of routine antenatal care are yet to be determined as the number of high quality trials and outcomes reported is too limited to draw conclusions on its usefulness and safety. further rigorous randomised trials are required to evaluate the role of vitamin d supplementation in pregnancy.
this systematic review could not demonstrate any significant beneficial effects of anabolic-androgenic steroids on any clinically important outcomes (mortality, liver-related mortality, liver complications, and histology) of patients with alcoholic liver disease.
currently, the limited evidence showed that robotic surgery did not benefit women with benign gynaecological disease in effectiveness or in safety. further well-designed rcts with complete reported data are required to confirm or refute this conclusion.
there is insufficient evidence to give clear recommendations for practice. there is inconsistent evidence that universal ultrasound results in a significant increase in treatment compared to the use of targeted ultrasound or clinical examination alone. neither of the ultrasound strategies have been demonstrated to improve clinical outcomes including late diagnosed ddh and surgery. the studies are substantially underpowered to detect significant differences in the uncommon event of late detected ddh or surgery. for infants with unstable hips or mildly dysplastic hips, use of delayed ultrasound and targeted splinting reduces treatment without significantly increasing the rate of late diagnosed ddh or surgery.
there is insufficient evidence from human rcts to conclude that mechanical chest compressions during cardiopulmonary resuscitation for cardiac arrest is associated with benefit or harm. widespread use of mechanical devices for chest compressions during cardiac is not supported by this review. more rcts that measure and account for cpr process in both arms are needed to clarify the potential benefit from this intervention.
evidence from randomised trials does not support the routine use of gcs to reduce the risk of dvt after acute stroke. there is insufficient evidence to support the routine use of ipc to reduce the risk of dvt in acute stroke and further larger randomised studies of ipc are needed to reliably assess the balance of risks and benefits of this intervention.
in patients with acute pancreatitis, enteral nutrition significantly reduced mortality, multiple organ failure, systemic infections, and the need for operative interventions compared to those who received tpn. in addition, there was a trend towards a reduction in length of hospital stay. these data suggest that en should be considered the standard of care for patients with acute pancreatitis requiring nutritional support.
the use of rimonabant after one year produces modest weight loss of approximately 5%. even modest amounts of weight loss may be potentially beneficial. the observed results should be interpreted with some caution, though, since the evaluated studies presented some deficiencies in methodological quality. studies with longer follow-ups after the end of treatment and of more rigorous quality should be done before definitive recommendations can be made regarding the role of this new medication in the management of overweight or obese patients.
although the results show a significant reduction in the need for exchange transfusion in those treated with intravenous immunoglobulin, the applicability of the results is limited. the number of studies and infants included is small and none of the three included studies was of high quality. the protocols of two of the studies mandated the use of early exchange transfusion, limiting the generalizability of the results. further well designed studies are needed before routine use of intravenous immunoglobulin can be recommended for the treatment of isoimmune haemolytic jaundice.
lifestyle intervention improves body composition, hyperandrogenism (high male hormones and clinical effects) and insulin resistance in women with pcos. there was no evidence of effect for lifestyle intervention on improving glucose tolerance or lipid profiles and no literature assessing clinical reproductive outcomes, quality of life and treatment satisfaction.
in people with cholera, ors ≤ 270 is associated with biochemical hyponatraemia when compared with ors ≥ 310, but there are no differences in terms of other outcomes. although this risk does not appear to be associated with any serious consequences, the total patient experience in existing trials is small. under wider practice conditions, especially where patient monitoring is difficult, caution is warranted.
the available evidence for adp receptor antagonists in patients with diabetes mellitus is limited and most trials do not report outcomes for patients with diabetes separately. therefore, recommendations for the use of adp receptor antagonists for the prevention of cvd in patients with diabetes are based on available evidence from trials including patients with and without diabetes. trials with diabetes patients and subgroup analyses of patients with diabetes in trials with combined populations are needed to provide a more robust evidence base to guide clinical management in patients with diabetes.
pei and pai do not differ significantly regarding benefits and harms in patients with early hcc, but only a limited number of patients have been examined and the risk of bias was high in all trials. there is also insufficient evidence to determine whether pei or segmental liver resection is more effective. while some data from the single trial suggested that pei was safer, the high risk of bias and the lack of any confirmatory evidence make an assessment impossible.
the majority of patients should be treated with short courses of palliative radiotherapy, of 1 or 2 fractions. care should be taken with the dose to the spinal cord. the use of high dose palliative regimens should be considered for and discussed with selected patients with good performance status. more research is needed into reducing the acute toxicity of large fraction regimens and into the role of radical compared to high dose palliative radiotherapy. in the future, large trials comparing different rt regimens may be difficult to set up because of the increasing use of systemic chemotherapy. trials looking at how best to integrate these two modalities, particularly in good ps patients, need to be carried out.
there is little evidence for macrolides in the treatment of dpb. we are therefore unable to make any new recommendations. it may be reasonable to use low-dose macrolides soon after diagnosis is made and to continue this treatment for at least six months, according to current guidelines.
we found no evidence to support the routine supplementation of parenterally fed neonates with carnitine.
based on two trials involving a small number of stroke survivors, ohc interventions can improve staff knowledge and attitudes, the cleanliness of patients' dentures and reduce the incidence of pneumonia. improvements in the cleanliness of patients teeth were not observed. further evidence relating to staff-led oral care interventions is severely lacking.
there is some evidence of benefit of rivastigmine in vci from trial data from three studies. however, this conclusion is based on one large study. rivastigmine is capable of inducing side effects that lead to withdrawal in a significant proportion of patients.
gdl is effective in reducing crash rates among young drivers, although the magnitude of the effect varies. the conclusions are supported by consistent findings, temporal relationship, and plausibility of the association. stronger gdl programs (i.e. more restrictions or higher quality based on iihs classification) appear to result in greater fatality reduction. future studies should focus on which components and combination of components yield the greatest reductions.
in preterm infants > 3 weeks of age with cld, acute and chronic administration of distal diuretics improve pulmonary mechanics. however, positive effects should be interpreted with caution as the numbers of patients studied are small in surprisingly few randomized controlled trials.
there are currently insufficient data from randomised controlled trials to draw any conclusions about the efficacy of transcranial magnetic stimulation in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
acetazolamide can produce a small increase in arterial po2 and fall in pco2. these conclusions are drawn from a few small short studies that were not all of high quality. it is not known whether this physiological improvement is associated with clinical benefit.
the evidence suggests that symptom-based wap are superior to peak flow wap for preventing acute care visits although there is insufficient data to firmly conclude whether the observed superiority is conferred by greater adherence to the monitoring strategy, earlier identification of onset of deteriorations, higher threshold for presentation to acute care settings, or the specific treatment recommendations.
this systematic review does not provide sufficient evidence for us to make firm recommendations about the use of tci versus mci in clinical anaesthetic practice.
local anaesthetic nerve blocks are more effective than placebo, opioid and non-opioid analgesia for pain management in labour based on rcts of unclear quality and limited numbers. side effects are more common after local anaesthetic nerve blocks in comparison with placebo. different local anaesthetic agents used for pain relief provide similar satisfaction with pain relief. further high-quality studies are needed to confirm the findings, to assess other outcomes and to compare local anaesthetic nerve blocks with various modalities for pain relief in labour.
the substantial heterogeneity across the included studies restricts our ability to draw firm conclusions about the effectiveness of different recruitment strategies in relation to recruitment of participants into smoking cessation programmes or levels of smoking cessation. the limited evidence, however, suggests that the following elements may improve the recruitment of smokers into cessation programmes: personal, tailored interventions; recruitment methods that are proactive in nature; and more intensive recruitment strategies (i.e., those strategies that require increased contact with potential participants).
there is currently no evidence to support the use of magnesium salts in patients with acute traumatic brain injury.
there is no clear evidence that antidepressants are more effective than placebo in the management of patients with chronic low-back pain. these findings do not imply that severely depressed patients with back pain should not be treated with antidepressants; furthermore, there is evidence for their use in other forms of chronic pain.
no definitive conclusions can be made regarding the benefits of exercise for individuals with vertebral fracture. although individual trials did report benefits for some pain, physical function and quality of life outcomes, the findings should be interpreted with caution given that findings were inconsistent and the quality of evidence was very low. the small number of trials and variability across trials limited our ability to pool outcomes or make conclusions. evidence regarding the effects of exercise after vertebral fracture, particularly for men, is scarce. a high-quality randomized trial is needed to inform exercise prescription for individuals with vertebral fractures.
trimetazidine is effective in the treatment of stable angina compared with placebo, alone or combined with conventional anti-anginal agents. trimetazidine may result in fewer dropouts due to adverse events. large, long term trials comparing trimetazidine with other anti-anginal drugs assessing clinically relevant important outcomes are required to establish its role in clinical management.
use of bisphosphonates in patients with mm reduces pathological vertebral fractures, sres and pain. assuming a baseline risk of 20% to 50% for vertebral fracture without treatment, between 8 and 20 mm patients should be treated to prevent vertebral fracture(s) in one patient. assuming a baseline risk of 31% to 76% for pain amelioration without treatment, between 5 and 13 mm patients should be treated to reduce pain in one patient. with a baseline risk of 35% to 86% for sres without treatment, between 6 and 15 mm patients should be treated to prevent sre(s) in one patient. overall, there were no significant adverse effects associated with the administration of bisphosphonates identified in the included rcts. we found no evidence of superiority of any specific aminobisphosphonate (zoledronate, pamidronate or ibandronate) or nonaminobisphosphonate (etidronate or clodronate) for any outcome. however, zoledronate appears to be superior to placebo and etidronate in improving os.
this review has not confirmed the perception that subtotal hysterectomy offers improved outcomes for sexual, urinary or bowel function when compared with total abdominal hysterectomy. women are more likely to experience ongoing cyclical bleeding up to a year after surgery with subtotal hysterectomy compared to total hysterectomy.
there is a need for improvement in conceptual clarity about the definition of health equity, describing sufficient detail about analytic approaches (including subgroup analyses) and transparent reporting of judgments required for applicability assessments in order to assess and report effects on health equity in systematic reviews.
the results of this systematic review and meta-analysis suggest that culturing embryos under conditions with low oxygen concentrations improves the success rates of ivf and icsi, resulting in the birth of more healthy newborns.
lmwhs are possibly as effective as vitamin k antagonists in preventing symptomatic vte after an episode of symptomatic deep venous thrombosis, but are much more expensive. treatment with lmwh is significantly safer than treatment with vitamin k antagonists. lmwh may result in fewer episodes of bleeding and is possibly a safe alternative in some patients, especially those in geographically inaccessible areas, are reluctant to visit the thrombosis service regularly, or with contraindications to vitamin k antagonists. however, treatment with vitamin k antagonists remains the treatment of choice for the majority of patients.
moderate quality evidence showed that employed patients with cancer experience return-to-work benefits from multidisciplinary interventions compared to care as usual. more high quality rcts aimed at enhancing return-to-work in cancer patients are needed.
data from rcts for any intervention used in improve kidney outcomes in children with hsp are very sparse except for short-term prednisone. there was no evidence of benefit of prednisone in preventing serious long-term kidney disease in hsp.
motivational interviewing may assist smokers to quit. however, the results should be interpreted with caution due to variations in study quality, treatment fidelity and the possibility of publication or selective reporting bias.
while not robust, the available evidence does not reveal any clear advantage of foot orthoses over simple insoles or physiotherapy for patellofemoral pain. while foot orthoses may help relieve knee pain over the short term, the benefit may be marginal. patients treated with orthoses are more likely to complain of mild adverse effects and discomfort.
the data included in this review, from three well-conducted randomised trials, suggest that different methods of sequencing ct and rt do not appear to have a major effect on recurrence or survival for women with breast cancer if rt is commenced within seven months after surgery.
this review provides limited evidence about the effectiveness and safety of chinese medicinal herbs in alleviating chemotherapy induced short term side effects. chinese medicinal herbs, when used together with chemotherapy, may offer some benefit to breast cancer patients in terms of bone marrow improvement and quality of life, but the evidence is too limited to make any confident conclusions. well designed clinical trials are required before any conclusions can be drawn about the effectiveness and safety of chm in the management of breast cancer patients.
simple behavioural methods may be effective for some children, but further trials are needed, in particular in comparison with treatments known to be effective, such as desmopressin, tricyclic drugs and alarms. however, simple methods could be tried as first line therapy before considering alarms or drugs, because these alternative treatments may be more demanding and may have adverse effects.
there is some evidence that in patients with idiopathic hypercalciuria and recurrent stones, the addition of thiazides to a normal or modified diet for short to long periods (five months to three years) reduced the number of stone recurrences and decreased the stone formation rate. thiazides and neutral potassium phosphate decreased calciuria in symptomatic patients with idiopathic hypercalciuria. there were no studies investigating the effect of pharmacological treatment on other clinical complications or asymptomatic idiopathic hypercalciuria.
this review notes a preference in more recent studies for less aggressive care options for treatment of bl. however, the evidence for the relative effectiveness of interventions to treat bl is not strong as studies were small, underpowered and prone to both systematic and random error. we included one additional trial without change of conclusions.
there is some evidence that social skills groups can improve social competence for some children and adolescents with asd. more research is needed to draw more robust conclusions, especially with respect to improvements in quality of life.
azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine are more effective than placebo for maintenance of remission in crohn's disease. higher response rates were obtained with azathioprine than 6-mercaptopurine. however, the one study evaluating 6-mercaptopurine used a relatively low dose of the drug. future studies should look at the effect of higher doses of 6-mercaptopurine. there is weak evidence for a steroid sparing effect with azathioprine treatment.
sham-controlled trials show statistically significant benefits; however, these benefits are small, do not meet our pre-defined thresholds for clinical relevance, and are probably due at least partially to placebo effects from incomplete blinding. waiting list-controlled trials of acupuncture for peripheral joint osteoarthritis suggest statistically significant and clinically relevant benefits, much of which may be due to expectation or placebo effects.
bisphosphonates are effective at preventing and treating corticosteroid-induced bone loss at the lumbar spine and femoral neck. efficacy regarding fracture prevention cannot be concluded from this analysis, although bone density changes are correlated with fracture risk.
trials have been heterogeneous and generally of low or moderate quality, making it difficult to offer any definitive recommendations on the effectiveness of cerumenolytics for the removal of symptomatic ear wax. using drops of any sort appears to be better than no treatment, but it is uncertain if one type of drop is any better than another. future trials should be of high methodological quality, have large sample sizes, and compare both oil-based and water-based solvents with placebo, no treatment or both.
this review failed to show any long-term effect of immunosuppressive treatment on patient and/or renal survival. there was an increased number of discontinuations due to adverse events in immunosuppressive treatment groups. within the class of alkylating agents there is weak evidence supporting the efficacy of cyclophosphamide as compared to chlorambucil. on the other hand, cyclophosphamide had fewer side effects leading to patient withdrawal than chlorambucil.
feedback or biofeedback may provide benefit in addition to pelvic floor muscle training in women with urinary incontinence. however, further research is needed to differentiate whether it is the feedback or biofeedback that causes the beneficial effect or some other difference between the trial arms (such as more contact with health professionals).
based on currently available published trials, there is insufficient evidence to draw firm conclusions about the efficacy of superoxide dismutase in preventing chronic lung disease of prematurity. data from a small number of treated infants suggest that it is well tolerated and has no serious adverse effects.
lamotrigine add-on therapy is effective in reducing the seizure frequency, in people with drug-resistant partial epilepsy. further trials are needed to assess the long-term effects of lamotrigine, and to compare it with other add-on drugs.two new trials have been included in this update, but the conclusions are unchanged.
the available data from randomised controlled trials are insufficient to determine whether glutamine supplementation has any important benefits for young infants with severe gastrointestinal disease.
the current available evidence primarily supports a lack of benefit of sti before switching therapy in patients with unsuppressed hiv viremia despite art. there is evidence of harm in attempting sti in patients with relatively advanced hiv disease, due to the associated cd4 cell decline and the increased risk of clinical disease progression. at this time, there is no evidence to recommend the use of sti in this clinical category of patients with treatment failure.
the results of this review support the current practice of iop lowering treatment of oht. a visual field protective effect has been clearly demonstrated for medical iop lowering treatment. positive but weak evidence for a beneficial effect of the class of beta-blockers has been shown. direct comparisons of prostaglandins or brimonidine to placebo are not available and the comparison of dorzolamide to placebo failed to demonstrate a protective effect. however, absence of data or failure to prove effectiveness should not be interpreted as proof of absence of any effect. the decision to treat a patient or not, as well as the decision regarding the drug with which to start treatment, should remain individualised, taking in to account the amount of damage, the level of iop, age and other patient characteristics.
there is a lack of evidence to support routine antibiotic treatment for acute toxoplasma retinochoroiditis. there is weak evidence to suggest that long-term treatment may reduce recurrence of retinochoroiditis in patients with chronic recurrent toxoplasma retinochoroiditis due to more virulent south american strains of toxoplasma gondii. placebo controlled trials of patients with acute and chronic toxoplasma retinochoroiditis affecting any part of the retina are required to determine the effectiveness of antibiotic treatment.
simple maternal hydration appears to increase amniotic fluid volume and may be beneficial in the management of oligohydramnios and prevention of oligohydramnios during labour or prior to external cephalic version. controlled trials are needed to assess the clinical benefits and possible risks of maternal hydration for specific clinical purposes.
primary thromboprophylaxis with lmwh significantly reduced the incidence of symptomatic vte in ambulatory cancer patients treated with chemotherapy. however, the lack of power hampers definite conclusions on the effects on major safety outcomes, which mandates additional studies to determine the risk to benefit ratio of lmwh in this setting.
there is no benefit with submacular surgery in most people with subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation due to amd in terms of prevention of visual loss. furthermore, the risk of developing cataract and retinal detachment increases after surgery.
pufas seem to have no major effect on the main clinical outcome in ms (disease progression), but they may tend to reduce the frequency of relapses over two years. however, the data that are available are insufficient to assess a real benefit or harm from pufa supplementation because of their uncertain quality. evidence on the possible benefits and risks of vitamin supplementation and antioxidant supplements in ms is lacking. more research is required to assess the effectiveness of dietary interventions in ms.
the current evidence base does not suggest that foam dressings are more effective in the healing of venous leg ulcers than other wound dressing treatments. the evidence in this area is of low quality. further evidence is required from well-designed and rigorously-conducted rcts, that employ methods to minimise bias and report them clearly, before any definitive conclusions can be made regarding the efficacy of foam dressings in the management of venous leg ulcers.
deferasirox offers an important alternative line of treatment for people with thalassaemia and secondary iron overload. based on the available data, deferasirox does not seem to be superior to deferoxamine at the usually recommended ratio of 1 mg of deferasirox to 2 mg of deferoxamine. however, similar efficacy seems to be achievable depending on the dose and ratio of deferasirox compared to deferoxamine. whether this will result in similar efficacy in the long run and will translate to similar benefits as has been shown for deferoxamine, needs to be confirmed. data on safety, particularly on rare toxicities and long-term safety, are still limited. therefore, we think that deferasirox should be offered as an alternative to all patients with thalassaemia who either show intolerance to deferoxamine or poor compliance with deferoxamine. in our opinion, data are still too limited to support the general recommendation of deferasirox as first-line treatment instead of deferoxamine. if a strong preference for deferasirox is expressed, it could be offered as first-line option to individual patients after a detailed discussion of the potential benefits and risks.
maintenance therapy compared to observation in apl patients improved dfs but not os. similarly, atra and chemotherapy compared to atra and probably atra based regimens compared to non-atra based regimens improved dfs but not os. the significance of these findings is limited due to clinical heterogeneity between studies.
1. evidence suggests that haloperidol was useful in reducing aggression, but was associated with adverse effects; there was no evidence to support the routine use of this drug for other manifestations of agitation in dementia.2. similar drop-out rates among haloperidol and placebo treated patients suggested that poorly controlled symptoms, or other factors, may be important in causing treatment discontinuation.3. variations in degree of dementia, dosage and length of haloperidol treatment, and in ways of assessing response to treatment suggested caution in the interpretation of reported effects of haloperidol in the management of agitation in dementia.4. the present study confirmed that haloperidol should not be used routinely to treat patients with agitated dementia. treatment of agitated dementia with haloperidol should be individualized and patients should be monitored for adverse effects of therapy.
the available data is insufficient to draw conclusions regarding the efficacy of continuous indomethacin infusion vs. bolus injections for the treatment of pda. although continuous indomethacin seems to cause less alterations in cerebral, renal and mesenteric circulations, the clinical meaning of this effect is unclear. definitive recommendations about the preferred method of indomethacin administration in premature infants cannot be made based on the current findings of this review.
there was insufficient evidence on the benefits and harms of co-bedding stable preterm twins to make any recommendation in practice. there is a need for future studies that are adequately powered to detect clinically important differences in growth and neurodevelopment. such studies should also assess harms including infections and medication errors, and caregiver satisfaction.
there is emerging, but as yet inconclusive evidence, to suggest that people in the prodrome of psychosis can be helped by some interventions. there is some support for specialised early intervention services, but further trials would be desirable, and there is a question of whether gains are maintained. there is some support for phase-specific treatment focused on employment and family therapy, but again, this needs replicating with larger and longer trials.
there is limited applicable evidence. therefore, no implications for practice can be drawn. further research is required and several trials are underway, the findings of which are anticipated to contribute to the body of evidence.
the probability of pregnancy varied widely in reported trials. a gel containing nonoxynol-9 52.5 mg was inferior to two other products tested in the largest trial. aside from this finding, personal characteristics and behavior of users may be more important than characteristics of the spermicide products in determining the probability of pregnancy. gel was liked more than the film or vaginal suppository in the largest trial. spermicide trials have the dual challenges of difficult recruitment and high discontinuation rates; the latter threatens trial validity.
currently data are limited. ziprasidone may be an effective antipsychotic with less extrapyramidal effects than haloperidol. it also, however, causes more nausea and vomiting than the typical drugs, and, at present, there is no data suggesting that it is different to other atypical compounds. well planned, conducted and reported long term randomised trials are needed if ziprasidone is to be accepted into everyday use.
the results seem to favour the use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in combination with antipsychotics on a few domains of mental state and cognition, but because of the various limitations in the studies as mentioned in the main text, the evidence is weak. this review highlights the need for large, independent, well designed, conducted and reported pragmatic randomised studies.
zolmitriptan and sumatriptan are effective in the acute treatment of cluster headaches and may provide a useful treatment option, potentially offering convenience over oxygen therapy and a better safety and tolerability profile than ergotamine. non-oral routes of administration are likely to provide better and more rapid responses.
no rct using idebenone or any other pharmacological treatment has shown significant benefit on neurological symptoms associated with friedreich ataxia. idebenone has shown a positive effect on left ventricular heart mass but the clinical relevance of this change was not assessed in the included study.
we found no reason to change current treatment recommendations, namely deferiprone is indicated for treating iron overload in people with thalassaemia major when desferrioxamine is contraindicated or inadequate. however, there is an urgent need for adequately-powered, high quality trials comparing the overall clinical efficacy and long-term outcome of deferiprone with desferrioxamine.
the trials we located suffered from a high risk of systematic errors ('bias') and high risk of random errors ('play of chance'). while probiotics appear to reduce plasma ammonia concentration when compared with placebo or no intervention, we are unable to conclude that probiotics are efficacious in altering clinically relevant outcomes. demonstration of unequivocal efficacy is needed before probiotics can be endorsed as effective therapy for hepatic encephalopathy. further randomised clinical trials are needed.
the present systematic review, including meta-analyses for select outcomes, suggests that although individual studies vary in their findings, there is no evidence to support a consistent, clinically important impact of antibiotics in reducing the main morbid outcomes following tonsillectomy (i.e. pain, need for analgesia and secondary haemorrhage rates). the limited benefit apparent with antibiotics may be a result of positive bias introduced by several important methodological shortcomings in the included trials. based on existing evidence, therefore, we would advocate against the routine prescription of antibiotics to patients undergoing tonsillectomy. whether a subgroup of patients who might benefit from selective administration of antibiotics exists is unknown and needs to be explored in future trials.
this review confirms the absence of evidence that any of the adjunctive therapies improves cognitive performance or quality of life, or both for patients with adc, though they were well tolerated and safe.
naloxone improves blood pressure, especially mean arterial blood pressure. however, the clinical usefulness of naloxone to treat shock remains to be determined and additional randomized controlled trials are needed to assess its usefulness.
use of aspirin for women undergoing in vitro fertilisation cannot be recommended due to lack of evidence from the current trial data. adequately powered trials are needed. it was proposed in the initial version of this review that a sample size of 350 women in each group would be required in order to demonstrate a 10% improvement from the use of aspirin, with 80% power at the 5% significance level. until such evidence is available, this treatment can not be recommended.
we found no convincing evidence to support the use of emergency sclerotherapy for variceal bleeding in cirrhosis as the first, single treatment when compared with vasoactive drugs. vasoactive drugs may be safe and effective whenever endoscopic therapy is not promptly available and seems to be associated with less adverse events than emergency sclerotherapy. other meta-analyses and guidelines advocate that combined vasoactive drugs and endoscopic therapy is superior to either intervention alone.
existing evidence does not provide conclusive evidence that the use of routine umbilical artery doppler ultrasound, or combination of umbilical and uterine artery doppler ultrasound in low-risk or unselected populations benefits either mother or baby. future studies should be designed to address small changes in perinatal outcome, and should focus on potentially preventable deaths.
all of the studies were small, of limited treatment duration and had short follow-up. however, because of the low cost and absence of adverse effects it is reasonable to consider autoinflation whilst awaiting natural resolution of otitis media with effusion. primary care could prove a beneficial place to evaluate such interventions and there is ongoing research in this area. further research should also consider the duration of treatment, the long-term impact on developmental outcomes in children and additional quality of life outcome measures for children and families.
we found limited evidence that immediate start of hormonal contraception reduces unintended pregnancies or increases method continuation. however, the pregnancy rate was lower with immediate start of dmpa versus another method. some differences were associated with contraceptive type rather than initiation method, i.e., immediate ring versus immediate coc. more studies are needed of immediate versus conventional start of the same hormonal contraceptive.
the evidence suggests that family and parenting interventions for juvenile delinquents and their families have beneficial effects on reducing time spent in institutions. this has an obvious benefit to the participant and their family and may result in a cost saving for society. these interventions may also reduce rates of subsequent arrest but at present these results need to be interpreted with caution due to the heterogeneity of the results.
tailored asthma interventions based on sputum eosinophils is beneficial in reducing the frequency of asthma exacerbations in adults with asthma. this review supports the use of sputum eosinophils to tailor asthma therapy for adults with frequent exacerbations and severe asthma. further studies need to be undertaken to strengthen these results and no conclusion can be drawn for children with asthma.
there is limited evidence from four small low-quality trials that the pronation method might be more effective and less painful than the supination method for manipulating pulled elbow in young children. we recommend that a high quality randomised trial be performed to strengthen the evidence.
the three trials are small, and not all of them reported on all outcomes. the results suggest that there are both potential benefits (increased maternal control and satisfaction during pregnancy, increased availability of antenatal records during hospital attendance) and harms (more operative deliveries). importantly, all of the trials report that more women in the case notes group would prefer to hold their antenatal records in another pregnancy. there is insufficient evidence on health related behaviours (smoking and breastfeeding) and clinical outcomes. it is important to emphasise that this review shows a lack of evidence of benefit rather than evidence of no benefit.
immediate art reduces morbidity and mortality among infants and may improve neurodevelopmental outcome. however it remains unclear whether all children diagnosed with hiv infection between 1-2 years of age should start art, as has been recommended by the world health organization on practical grounds. the available evidence suggests that a lpv/r-based first-line regimen is more potent than nvp, regardless of pmtct exposure status. however, this finding provides a dilemma to policy-makers because higher cost, poor palatability, inconvenient formulation and cold chain requirements make lpv/r a more costly and challenging first-line regimen. an alternative approach to long-term lpv/r is switching to nvp (maintaining the nrti backbone) once virological suppression is achieved. this strategy looked promising in the one trial undertaken, but may be difficult to implement in the absence of vl testing. ongoing trials are exploring the possibility of starting early art and interrupting treatment beyond the critical period of rapid disease progression and neurological development. further evidence is urgently required to better inform policy on first-line treatment recommendations in young children and more robust data addressing non-virological outcomes are also needed.
data from the available trials are insufficient to guide continence care of adults after stroke. however, there was suggestive evidence that professional input through structured assessment and management of care and specialist continence nursing may reduce urinary incontinence and related symptoms after stroke. better quality evidence is required of the range of interventions that have been suggested for continence care after stroke.
this meta-analysis showed that adult patients between 16 and 60 years of age with early unfavourable or advanced stage hl benefited from chemotherapy including escalated beacopp regarding pfs, but there was no significant difference in os. longer follow-up and the inclusion of the eortc 20012 trial will lead to a more definitive answer with respect to os.
seven included trials evaluated neck dissection surgery in patients with oral cavity cancers. the review found weak evidence that elective neck dissection of clinically negative neck nodes at the time of removal of the primary tumour results in reduced locoregional recurrence, but there is insufficient evidence to conclude that elective neck dissection increases overall survival or disease free survival compared to therapeutic neck dissection. there is very weak evidence from one trial that elective supraomohyoid neck dissection may be associated with increased overall and disease free survival. there is no evidence that radical neck dissection increases overall survival compared to conservative neck dissection surgery. reporting of adverse events in all trials was poor and it was not possible to compare the quality of life of patients undergoing different surgeries.
in prevention trials, early intervention with amniotomy and oxytocin appears to be associated with a modest reduction in the rate of caesarean section over standard care.
haloperidol decanoate may have a substantial effect in improving the symptoms and behaviour associated with schizophrenia in comparison to placebo, but data are remarkably sparse. there are no discernible differences between the depot form of haloperidol and its oral equivalent. for those needing and willing to take the drug, the means of administration is then a matter of individual choice and clinical judgement. as there are no clear differences between haloperidol decanoate and other depots, the choice of depot medication could also be individually tailored and patient preference exercised. well-conducted and reported randomised trials are needed comparing haloperidol decanoate with other depots but the comparison of haloperidol decanoate to oral antipsychotics is a priority.
evidence is limited and dated. day hospital care may help avoid inpatient care but data are lacking on missing on a raft of outcomes that are now considered important, such as quality of life, satisfaction, healthy days, and cost.
there is insufficient clinical trial evidence regarding the effects of garlic in preventing or treating the common cold. a single trial suggested that garlic may prevent occurrences of the common cold but more studies are needed to validate this finding. claims of effectiveness appear to rely largely on poor-quality evidence.
collaboration between local health and local government is commonly considered best practice. however, the review did not identify any reliable evidence that interagency collaboration, compared to standard services, necessarily leads to health improvement. a few studies identified component benefits but these were not reflected in overall outcome scores and could have resulted from the use of significant additional resources. although agencies appear enthusiastic about collaboration, difficulties in the primary studies and incomplete implementation of initiatives have prevented the development of a strong evidence base. if these weaknesses are addressed in future studies (for example by providing greater detail on the implementation of programmes; using more robust designs, integrated process evaluations to show how well the partners of the collaboration worked together, and measurement of health outcomes) it could provide a better understanding of what might work and why. it is possible that local collaborative partnerships delivering environmental interventions may result in health gain but the evidence base for this is very limited. evaluations of interagency collaborative arrangements face many challenges. the results demonstrate that collaborative community partnerships can be established to deliver interventions but it is important to agree goals, methods of working, monitoring and evaluation before implementation to protect programme fidelity and increase the potential for effectiveness.
the studies were highly heterogeneous and results were inconsistent. heterogeneity in study design needs to be addressed in future research in order to test the efficacy of this intervention. international cough guidelines recommend that a trial of ics should only be considered in patients after thorough evaluation including chest x-ray and consideration of spirometry and other appropriate investigations.
there was evidence of improved pregnancy outcomes with progestogen pre-treatment and poorer pregnancy outcomes with a combined ocp pre-treatment. however, we conclude that major changes in art protocols should not be made at this time, since the number of overall studies in the subgroups is small and reporting of the major outcomes is inadequate.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to determine whether ergonomic positioning or equipment is beneficial or harmful for treating carpal tunnel syndrome.
based on existing evidence, routine late pregnancy ultrasound in low-risk or unselected populations does not confer benefit on mother or baby. it may be associated with a small increase in caesarean section rates. there is a lack of data about the potential psychological effects of routine ultrasound in late pregnancy, and limited data about its effects on both short- and long-term neonatal and childhood outcome. placental grading in the third trimester may be valuable, but whether reported results are reproducible remains to be seen, and future research of late pregnancy ultrasound should include evaluation of placental textural assessment.
exercise programs starting four to six weeks post-surgery seem to lead to a faster decrease in pain and disability than no treatment. high intensity exercise programs seem to lead to a faster decrease in pain and disability than low intensity programs. there were no significant differences between supervised and home exercises for pain relief, disability, or global perceived effect. there is no evidence that active programs increase the re-operation rate after first-time lumbar surgery.
this review which was based on one methodologically sound but low powered small sample trial provides some evidence that there is no significant difference in pain relief for patients with untreated irreversible pulpitis who did or did not receive antibiotics in addition to analgesics.
the evidence currently available is rather limited. for men with antidepressant-induced erectile dysfunction, the addition of sildenafil or tadalafil appears to be an effective strategy. for women with antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction the addition of bupropion at higher doses appears to be the most promising approach studied so far.
this review concluded that the data available were too limited to either support or refute the use of routine or selective shunting in carotid endarterectomy. it was suggested that large scale randomised trials between routine shunting versus selective shunting were required. no one method of monitoring in selective shunting has been shown to produce better outcomes.
despite the methodological limitations and the variability in degree of signal to noise effect, the consistency of reported reductions in speed and crash outcomes across all studies show that speed cameras are a worthwhile intervention for reducing the number of road traffic injuries and deaths. however, whilst the the evidence base clearly demonstrates a positive direction in the effect, an overall magnitude of this effect is currently not deducible due to heterogeneity and lack of methodological rigour. more studies of a scientifically rigorous and homogenous nature are necessary, to provide the answer to the magnitude of effect.
pharmacist-provided services that target patients may improve clinical outcomes such as management of high glucose levels among diabetic patients, management of blood pressure and cholesterol levels and may improve the quality of life of patients with chronic conditions such as diabetes, hypertension and asthma. pharmacist services may reduce health service utilisation such as visits to general practitioners and hospitalisation rates. we are uncertain about the effect of educational sessions by pharmacists for healthcare professionals due to the imprecision of a single study included in this review. similarly, conclusions could not be drawn for health service utilisation and costs due to lack of evidence on interventions delivered by pharmacists to healthcare professionals. these results were heterogenous in the types of outcomes measured, clinical conditions and approaches to measurement of outcomes, and require cautious interpretation. all eligible studies were from middle income countries and the results may not be applicable to low income countries.
oral and intravenous bisphosphonates increase bone mineral density in people with cystic fibrosis. severe bone pain and flu-like symptoms may occur with intravenous agents. additional trials are needed to determine if bone pain is more common or severe (or both) with the more potent zoledronate and if corticosteroids ameliorate or prevent these adverse events. additional trials are also required to further assess gastrointestinal adverse effects associated with oral bisphosphonates. trials in larger populations are needed to determine effects on fracture rate and survival.
this review has provided evidence that brief co-incubation of sperm and oocytes may improve the ongoing pregnancy and clinical pregnancy rates for infertile women undergoing ivf cycles. more rcts are required to assess whether brief co-incubation would contribute to a higher live birth rate and a lower miscarriage rate compared to the standard overnight insemination protocol.
home fortification of foods with multiple micronutrient powders is an effective intervention to reduce anaemia and iron deficiency in children six months to 23 months of age. the provision of mnp is better than no intervention or placebo and possibly comparable to commonly used daily iron supplementation. the benefits of this intervention as a child survival strategy or on developmental outcomes are unclear. data on effects on malaria outcomes are lacking and further investigation of morbidity outcomes is needed. the micronutrient powders containing multiple nutrients are well accepted but adherence is variable and in some cases comparable to that achieved in infants and young children receiving standard iron supplements as drops or syrups.
very potent topical steroids are effective and safe treatments for bp, but their use in extensive disease may be limited by side-effects and practical factors. milder regimens (using lower doses of steroids) are safe and effective in moderate bp. starting doses of prednisolone greater than 0.75 mg/kg/day do not give additional benefit, lower doses may be adequate to control disease and reduce the incidence and severity of adverse reactions. the effectiveness of adding plasma exchange, azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil to corticosteroids, and combination treatment with tetracycline and nicotinamide needs further investigation.
betastimulants, to facilitate ecv, increased cephalic presentation in labour and birth, and reduced the caesarean section rate in both nulliparous and multiparous women, but there were insufficient data on adverse effects. calcium channel blockers and nitric acid donors had insufficient data to provide good evidence. at present we recommend betamimetics for facilitating ecv. there is scope for further research. the possible benefits of tocolysis to reduce the force required for successful version and the possible risks of maternal cardiovascular side effects, need to be addressed further. further trials are needed to compare the effectiveness of routine versus selective use of tocolysis, the role of regional analgesia, fetal acoustic stimulation, amnioinfusion and the effect of intravenous or oral hydration prior to ecv. although randomised trials of nitroglycerine are small, the results are sufficiently negative to discourage further trials.
the results based on the three included studies in this review did not support the use of nebulised rhdnase in children under 24 months of age hospitalised with acute bronchiolitis. in these patients, treatment did not shorten the length of hospitalisation or improve clinical outcomes. it might have a role in severe bronchiolitis complicated by atelectasis, but further clinical studies would need to be performed.
there is no current evidence supporting the routine use of g-csf in the treatment of pneumonia. studies in which g-csf is administered prophylactically or earlier in therapy may be of interest.
there are more data for fluphenazine decanoate than for the enanthate ester. both are effective antipsychotic preparations. in the context of trials, there is little advantage of these depots over oral medications in terms of compliance but this is unlikely to be applicable to everyday clinical practice.
home- and centre-based cardiac rehabilitation appear to be equally effective in improving the clinical and health-related quality of life outcomes in acute mi and revascularisation patients. this finding, together with an absence of evidence of difference in healthcare costs between the two approaches, would support the extension of home-based cardiac rehabilitation programmes such as the heart manual to give patients a choice in line with their preferences, which may have an impact on uptake of cardiac rehabilitation in the individual case.
oxcarbazepine and carbamazepine appear to be similarly effective and well tolerated. however, the possibility of important differences existing between these drugs cannot be ruled out.
on the basis of the findings of this review, we cannot recommend that amniotomy should be introduced routinely as part of standard labour management and care. we recommend that the evidence presented in this review should be made available to women offered an amniotomy and may be useful as a foundation for discussion and any resulting decisions made between women and their caregivers.
injected cholera vaccines appear to be safe and relatively more effective than usually realized. protection against cholera persists for up to two years following a single dose of vaccine, and for three years with an annual booster. however, they have been superseded by oral vaccines.
ppi treatment initiated before endoscopy for upper gastrointestinal bleeding might reduce the proportion of participants with srh at index endoscopy and significantly reduces requirement for endoscopic therapy during index endoscopy. however, there is no evidence that ppi treatment affects clinically important outcomes, namely mortality, rebleeding or need for surgery.
there are insufficient randomised controlled trials of infliximab, budesonide, tenovil and interleukin-10 to draw conclusions. nitro-imidazole antibiotics, mesalamine and immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine/6-mp or infliximab all appear to be superior to placebo for the prevention of post-operative recurrence of crohn's disease. the cost, toxicity and tolerability of these approaches require careful consideration to determine the optimal approach for post-operative prophylaxis.
there is evidence that preoperative smoking interventions including nrt increase short-term smoking cessation and may reduce postoperative morbidity. the optimal preoperative intervention intensity remains unknown. based on indirect comparisons and evidence from two small trials, interventions that begin four to eight weeks before surgery, include weekly counselling, and use nrt are more likely to have an impact on complications and on long-term smoking cessation.
there is some evidence that physical activity programs might promote short-term weight gain and bone mineralization in preterm infants. data is inadequate to assess harm or long-term effects. current evidence does not support the routine use of physical activity programs in preterm infants. further trials incorporating infants with a high baseline risk of osteopenia are required. these trials should address adverse events, long-term outcomes, and the effects of nutritional intake (calories, protein, calcium, phosphorus).
the review set out to examine the potential of financial support to poor families to improve circumstances for children. however, on the basis of current evidence we cannot state unequivocally whether financial benefits delivered as an intervention are effective at improving child health or well-being in the short term. our conclusions are limited by the fact that most of the studies had small effects on total household income and that, while no conditions were attached to how money was spent, all studies included strict conditions for receipt of payments. we note particular concerns by some authors that sanctions and conditions (such as working hours) placed on families may increase family stress.
the available literature is insufficient to determine the appropriate analgesia or anesthesia for sterilization by hysteroscopy. compared to paracervical block with normal saline, paracervical block with lidocaine reduced pain during some portions of the procedure. intravenous sedation resulted in lower pain scores during insertion of the second tubal device. however, neither paracervical block with lidocaine nor conscious sedation significantly reduced overall pain scores for sterilization by hysteroscopy.
intratracheal administration of synthetic surfactant to infants with established respiratory distress syndrome has been demonstrated to improve clinical outcome. infants who are treated with synthetic surfactant have a decreased risk of pneumothorax, a decreased risk of pulmonary interstitial emphysema, a decreased risk of intraventricular hemorrhage, a decreased risk of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, a decreased risk of neonatal mortality, a decreased risk of mortality prior to hospital discharge and at 1 year of age. infants who receive synthetic surfactant treatment for established rds have an increased risk of apnea of prematurity.
hydroxychloroquine appears to be efficacious for the treatment of ra. its overall effect appears to be moderate, but its low toxicity profile should be considered when treating patients with ra.
trials have shown limited evidence that agents that reduce gastric acidity are associated with improvement in gastro-intestinal symptoms and fat absorption. currently, there is insufficient evidence to indicate whether there is an improvement in nutritional status, lung function, quality of life, or survival. we therefore recommend that large, multicentre, randomised controlled clinical trials are undertaken to evaluate these interventions.
neuromuscular training alone appears effective in the short term but whether this advantage would persist on longer-term follow-up is not known. while there is insufficient evidence to support any one surgical intervention over another surgical intervention for chronic ankle instability, it is likely that there are limitations to the use of dynamic tenodesis. after surgical reconstruction, early functional rehabilitation appears to be superior to six weeks immobilisation in restoring early function.
no donors do not appear currently to be a useful tool in the process of induction of labour. more studies are required to examine how no donors may work alongside established induction of labour protocols, especially those based in outpatient settings.
potassium supplementation has no statistically significant effect on blood pressure. due to small number of participants in the two high quality trials, the short duration of follow-up, and the unexplained heterogeneity between trials, the evidence about the effect of potassium supplementation on blood pressure is not conclusive. further high quality rcts of longer duration are required to clarify whether potassium supplementation can reduce blood pressure and improve health outcomes.
there was no convincing evidence from trials of sufficient methodological quality to support the routine use of ginkgo biloba extract to promote recovery after stroke. high-quality and large-scale randomised controlled trials are needed to test its efficacy.
all treatments evaluated within the included studies are effective. benzodiazepines, however, have the potential to cause respiratory depression, probably midazolam more so than lorazepam, and use of this group of drugs outside of services fully confident of observing for and managing the consequences of respiratory distress is difficult to justify. haloperidol used on its own is at such risk of generating preventable adverse effects that unless it is the only choice, this evidence directs that this sole treatment should be avoided. olanzapine im is valuable when compared with haloperidol plus promethazine but its duration of action is short and re-injection is frequently needed. haloperidol plus promethazine used in two diverse situations in brazil and india has much evidence to support its swift and safe clinically valuable effects.
in advanced stage metastatic uterine carcinosarcoma as well as recurrent disease adjuvant combination, chemotherapy with ifosfamide should be considered. combination chemotherapy with ifosfamide and paclitaxel is associated with lower risk of death compared with ifosfamide alone. in addition, radiotherapy to the abdomen is not associated with improved survival.
the need for blood transfusions corresponded to one half unit of blood saved per patient. it is doubtful whether this effect is worthwhile. the findings do not suggest a need for further placebo-controlled trials of the type reviewed here. a large placebo controlled trial enrolling thousands of patients is needed if one wishes to rule out the possibility that a worthwhile effect on mortality might have been overlooked.
the evidence for a 14% relative reduction in preterm birth for zinc compared with placebo was primarily represented by trials involving women of low income and this has some relevance in areas of high perinatal mortality. there was no convincing evidence that zinc supplementation during pregnancy results in other useful and important benefits. since the preterm association could well reflect poor nutrition, studies to address ways of improving the overall nutritional status of populations in impoverished areas, rather than focusing on micronutrient and or zinc supplementation in isolation, should be an urgent priority.
this review provides some evidence that weighted vaginal cones are better than no active treatment in women with sui and may be of similar effectiveness to pfmt and electrostimulation. this conclusion must remain tentative until larger, high-quality studies, that use comparable and relevant outcomes, are completed. cones could be offered as one treatment option, if women find them acceptable.
there is some evidence of benefit for thalidomide and clofazimine, but generally we did not find clear evidence of benefit for interventions in the management of enl. however, this does not mean they do not work, because the studies were small and poorly reported. larger studies using clearly defined participants, outcome measures, and internationally recognised scales are urgently required.
in the era of open cholecystectomy, open bile duct surgery was superior to ercp in achieving cbd stone clearance. in the laparoscopic era, data are close to excluding a significant difference between laparoscopic and ercp clearance of cbd stones. the use of ercp necessitates increased number of procedures per patient.
risperidone appears to have a marginal benefit in terms of clinical improvement compared with placebo in the first few weeks of treatment but data are limited, poorly reported and probably biased in favour of risperidone. the margin of improvement chosen by the researchers as their outcome may not be clinically meaningful. even after so much use of this drug, we feel that further independent trials can be justified.
there is low quality evidence that contracting-in may improve health care accessibility and utilization and that intermittent training courses may improve district health systems managers’ performance. more evidence is required before firm conclusions can be drawn regarding the effectiveness of these interventions in diverse settings. other interventions that might be promising candidates for hiring and retaining (e.g., government regulations, professional support programs) as well as training district health systems managers (e.g., in-service workshops with on-site support) have not been adequately investigated.
due to insufficient good quality data and lack of randomised studies it is impossible to draw definite conclusions on the effectiveness of interventions for pps. results indicate that ivig, lamotrigine, muscle strengthening exercises and static magnetic fields may be beneficial but need further investigation.
in short-term studies, oral paliperidone is an antipsychotic drug that is more efficacious than placebo. we found its adverse effects to be similar to those of its parent compound, risperidone, with movement disorders, weight gain and tachycardia all more common with paliperidone than placebo. while no difference was found in the incidence of reported adverse sexual outcomes, paliperidone is associated with substantial increases in serum prolactin. when used at doses of 6 mg per day or higher, oral paliperidone appears comparable in efficacy to olanzapine 10 mg/day. a single study of six days duration found neither an advantage nor disadvantage of paliperidone compared to risperidone. when dosed flexibly with other psychotropics available, it appears to be comparable in efficacy to flexible doses of quetiapine with other psychotropics available.
there is an indication that zuclopenthixol causes movement disorders, perhaps more so than the newer generation of drugs, though no more frequently than the older generation of antipsychotics. there is some suggestion from this review that oral zuclopenthixol may have some clinical advantage, at least in the short term, over other older drugs in terms of global state. if an older drug is going to be prescribed, zuclopenthixol dihydrochloride is a viable option but may be best taken with additional medication to offset movement disorders that occur in about half the people taking this drug. there is no information on service, functional, behavioural outcomes and important outcomes such as relapse, for such a widely used drug this would indicate the need for further studies. we feel that it should remain a choice in the treatment of those for whom older generation drugs are indicated. note: the 8 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
meta-analysis was not possible in this systematic review. in the one study that matched the inclusion criteria allopurinol decreased "in office" and ambulatory systolic and diastolic bp. because there was only one included rct, the number of patients providing data on pharmacotherapy for hyperuricemia in hypertension is small and restricted to adolescents with recently diagnosed mild essential hypertension. hence, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of allopurinol or other hypouricemic drugs as an initial or adjuvant treatment of hypertension and more rcts are needed.
although the evidence from two rcts suggests that calcium supplementation might contribute to a moderate degree to the prevention of colorectal adenomatous polyps, this does not constitute sufficient evidence to recommend the general use of calcium supplements to prevent colorectal cancer.
the results of this review showed losigamone can reduce seizure frequency but was associated with more treatment withdrawals when used as an add-on therapy for people with partial epilepsy. however, trials included were of short-term duration and uncertain quality. future well-designed randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials with a longer-term duration are needed.
our findings suggest that many older people with alzheimer's dementia and nps can be withdrawn from chronic antipsychotic medication without detrimental effects on their behaviour. it remains uncertain whether withdrawal is beneficial for cognition or psychomotor status, but the results of this review suggest that discontinuation programmes could be incorporated into routine practice. however, two studies of people whose agitation or psychosis had previously responded well to antipsychotic treatment found an increased risk of relapse or shorter time to relapse after discontinuation. two other studies suggest that people with more severe nps at baseline could benefit from continuing their antipsychotic medication. in these people, withdrawal might not be recommended.
central retinal thickness measured with oct cannot be used as a stand-alone test to diagnose the central type of csmo and decide on the use of laser photocoagulation in patients who are referred to retina clinics. in fact, there is a substantial disagreement of oct with the etdrs definition of csmo based on clinical examination. some researchers have observed that oct can detect macular thickening earlier than clinical examination, but also found that such cases did not necessarily progress to csmo and need photocoagulation. care should be taken in applying the conclusions of this review to other test-treatment pathways. in fact, oct will become an essential tool to manage antiangiogenic therapy, an expanding therapeutic option for patients with macular oedema due to dr, because oct is a component of the diagnostic algorithms of studies on this new treatment.
rituximab maintenance therapy should be added to standard therapy of patients with relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma following a successful induction treatment. the drug should be given either as four weekly infusions every six months or as a single infusion every two to three months. future randomised controlled trials should explore the effect of different protocols of rituximab maintenance therapy on overall survival.
we observed no differences with the use of ino in the outcomes reviewed. no data were available for several clinical outcomes including long-term mortality and neurodevelopmental outcome. we found it difficult to draw valid conclusions given concerns regarding methodologic quality, sample size, and heterogeneity.
combined chiropractic interventions slightly improved pain and disability in the short-term and pain in the medium-term for acute and subacute lbp. however, there is currently no evidence that supports or refutes that these interventions provide a clinically meaningful difference for pain or disability in people with lbp when compared to other interventions. future research is very likely to change the estimate of effect and our confidence in the results.
small trials of exercise, creatine, purified brain gangliosides, and orthoses have been performed. none showed significant benefit. a very small trial of neurotrophin-3 showed possible minor benefit which needs to be replicated in a larger trial. none of the two trials were large enough to detect moderate benefit or harm. larger rcts are needed for any form of pharmacological intervention as well as as for any form of physical intervention. outcome measures should include a validated composite scale such as the charcot-marie-tooth neuropathy scale.
the review established the paucity of high quality evidence investigating the efficacy of psychotherapy combined with benzodiazepines for panic disorder. currently, there is inadequate evidence to assess the clinical effects of psychotherapy combined with benzodiazepines for patients who are diagnosed with panic disorder.
it is unlikely that magnesium supplementation provides clinically meaningful cramp prophylaxis to older adults experiencing skeletal muscle cramps. in contrast, for those experiencing pregnancy-associated rest cramps the literature is conflicting and further research in this patient population is needed. we found no randomized controlled trials evaluating magnesium for exercise-associated muscle cramps or disease state-associated muscle cramps (for example amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease).
in adults with asthma, using moderate to high maintenance doses of ics, the addition of laba has an ics-sparing effect. the addition of laba permits more participants on minimum maintenance ics to reduce ics. the precise magnitude of the ics dose reduction requires further study.
no trials show interventions for trichiasis prevent blindness. certain interventions have been shown to be more effective at eliminating trichiasis. full thickness incision of the tarsal plate and rotation of the lash-bearing lid margin through 180 degrees is probably the best technique and is preferably delivered in the community. the use of double-sided sticking plaster is more effective than epilation as a temporary measure. surgery may be carried out by an ophthalmologist or a trained ophthalmic assistant. the addition of azithromycin treatment at the time of surgery does not appear to improve outcomes.
the changes seen in these trials are small and probably of limited clinical significance. given the side effects of gold and necessity for monitoring the use of gold as a steroid sparing agent in asthma cannot be recommended.
the methodological quality and the reporting of the included studies were too poor to draw any useful conclusions.
addition of a beta-blocker to diuretics or calcium-channel blockers reduces bp by 6/4mmhg at 1 times the starting dose and by 8/6 mmhg at 2 times the starting dose. when the blood pressure lowering effect of beta-blockers from this review was compared to that of thiazide diuretics from our previous review (chen 2009), second-line beta-blockers reduce systolic bp to the same extent as second-line thiazide diuretics, but reduce diastolic bp to a greater degree. the different effect on diastolic bp means that beta-blockers have little or no effect on pulse pressure whereas thiazides cause a significant dose-related decrease in pulse pressure. this difference in the pattern of bp lowering with beta-blockers as compared to thiazides might be the explanation for the fact that beta-blockers appear to be less effective at reducing adverse cardiovascular outcomes than thiazide diuretics, particularly in older individuals.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate corticosteroid treatment for people with acute presumed ischaemic stroke. the conclusions are unchanged since the previous update.
implications for practice there is not enough evidence to support the use of prophylactic oxygen therapy for women in labour, nor to evaluate its effectiveness for fetal distress. implications for research in view of the widespread use of oxygen administration during labour and the possibility that it may be ineffective or harmful, there is an urgent need for randomized trials to assess its effects.
antibiotic prophylaxis should be offered to those undergoing surgery for closed fracture fixation.
specialised antenatal clinics are now an accepted part of care in many settings, and carrying out further randomised trials may not be possible. any future research in this area should include psychological outcomes and should focus on which aspects of service provision are preferred by women. such research could underpin further service development in this area.
there is insufficient evidence to assess the value of light therapy for people with dementia. most of the available studies are not of high methodological quality and further research is required.
our review suggests there is insufficient evidence to support tocolytic therapy for women with pprom, as there was an increase in maternal chorioamnionitis without significant benefits to the infant. however, studies did not consistently administer latency antibiotics and corticosteroids, both of which are now considered standard of care.
currently there is no research evidence to suggest that any type of hydrocolloid wound dressing is more effective in healing diabetic foot ulcers than other types of dressing. decision makers may wish to consider aspects such as dressing cost and the wound management properties offered by each dressing type e.g. exudate management.
combined unfractionated heparin and aspirin may reduce pregnancy loss by 54%. large, randomised controlled trials with adequate allocation concealment are needed to explore potential differences between unfractionated heparin and lmwh. [note: the 15 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is currently insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about the efficacy and safety of rtms in the treatment of als. further studies may be helpful if their potential benefit is weighed against the impact of participation in a randomised controlled trial on people with als.
both drugs have equivalent efficacies in initial treatment of hiv infection when combined with two nrtis, but different side effects.
adeno-/tonsillectomy is effective in reducing the number of episodes of sore throat and days with sore throats in children, the gain being more marked in those most severely affected. the size of the effect is modest, but there may be a benefit to knowing the precise timing of one episode of pain lasting several days - it occurs immediately after surgery as a direct consequence of it. it is clear that some children get better without any surgery, and that whilst removing the tonsils will always prevent 'tonsillitis', the impact of the procedure on 'sore throats' due to pharyngitis is much less predictable.
in patients with viable lesions, evidence from trials of adults suggests albendazole may reduce the number of lesions. in trials of non-viable lesions, seizure recurrence was substantially lower with albendazole, which is counter-intuitive. it may be that steroids influence headache during treatment, but further research is needed to test this.
there are significant safety concerns regarding epo therapy for stroke. it is too early to know whether other csfs improve functional outcome.
of the h2ras evaluated cimetidine appears to confer a survival benefit when given as an adjunct to curative surgical resection of colorectal cancers. the trial designs were heterogeneous and adjuvant therapy has evolved since these trials were performed. further prospective randomised studies are warranted.
there were insufficient data to determine which intervention is best for urethral stricture disease in terms of balancing efficacy, adverse effects and costs. well designed, adequately powered multi-centre trials are needed to answer relevant clinical questions regarding treatment of men with urethral strictures.
numerous drugs have been tried in the management of aggression in abi but without firm evidence of their efficacy. it is therefore important to choose drugs with few side effects and to monitor their effect. beta-blockers have the best evidence for efficacy and deserve more attention. the lack of evidence highlights the need for better evaluations of drugs for this important problem.
there is very low quality evidence for the efficacy of most neurosurgical procedures for trigeminal neuralgia because of the poor quality of the trials. all procedures produced variable pain relief, but many resulted in sensory side effects. there were no studies of microvascular decompression which observational data suggests gives the longest pain relief. there is little evidence to help comparative decision making about the best surgical procedure. well designed studies are urgently needed.
the current evidence is promising but not yet sufficiently robust to support the routine use of fibrinogen depleting agents for the treatment of acute ischaemic stroke. further trials are needed to determine whether there is worthwhile benefit, and if so, which categories of patients are most likely to benefit.
although the studies are not extensive, this meta-analysis shows a large fall in bp with salt restriction, similar to that of single drug therapy. all diabetics should consider reducing salt intake at least to less than 5-6 g/day in keeping with current recommendations for the general population and may consider lowering salt intake to lower levels, although further studies are needed.
based on the results of these trials, it cannot be confirmed that intravenous naftidrofuryl is effective in the treatment of people with critical limb ischaemia. however, these results were based on trials of generally low methodological quality which had only a small number of participants, the duration of treatment was extremely short, and the methods varied between the trials. the wide range of endpoints effectively precluded any meaningful pooling of the results. intravenous naftidrofuryl was withdrawn as a treatment for severe peripheral arterial disease in 1995 because of reported side effects.
available evidence from randomised trials supports the use of vaginal misoprostol as a medical treatment to terminate non-viable pregnancies before 24 weeks. further research is required to assess effectiveness and safety, optimal route of administration and dose. conflicting findings about the value of mifepristone need to be resolved by additional study. [note: the 108 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the majority of published literature on the use of botulinum toxin in the treatment of strabismus consists of retrospective studies, cohort studies or case reviews. although these provide useful descriptive information, clarification is required as to the effective use of botulinum toxin as an independent treatment modality. four rcts on the therapeutic use of botulinum toxin in strabismus have shown varying responses ranging from a lack of evidence for prophylactic effect of botulinum toxin in acute sixth nerve palsy, to poor response in patients with horizontal strabismus without binocular vision, to no difference in response in patients that required retreatment for acquired esotropia or infantile esotropia. it was not possible to establish dose effect information. complication rates for use of botox™ or dysport™ ranged from 24% to 55.54%.
as none of the currently available chemotherapeutic protocols for induction therapy in indolent b cell lymphoid malignancies confer a survival benefit and due to the improved progression-free survival in each of the included trials, and a similar rate of grade 3 or 4 adverse events, bendamustine may be considered for the treatment of patients with indolent b cell lymphoid malignancies. however, the unclear effect on survival and the higher rate of adverse events compared to chlorambucil in patients with cll/sll does not support the use of bendamustine for these patients. the effect of bendamustine combined with rituximab should be evaluated in randomised clinical trials with more homogenous populations and outcomes for specific subgroups of patients by type of lymphoma should be reported. any future trial should evaluate the effect of bendamustine on quality of life.
evidence from randomized trials in hyperglycemic vlbw neonates is insufficient to determine the effects of treatment on death or major morbidities. it remains uncertain whether the hyperglycemia per se is a cause of adverse clinical outcomes or how the hyperglycemia should be treated. much larger randomized trials in hyperglycemic vlbw neonates that are powered on clinical outcomes are needed in order to determine whether, and how, the hyperglycemia should be treated.
data relevant to the effects of olanzapine im are taken from some studies that may not be considered ethical in many places, all are funded by a company with a pecuniary interest in the result. these studies often poorly report outcomes that are difficult to interpret for routine care. other important outcomes are not recorded at all. nevertheless, olanzapine im probably has some value in helping manage acute aggression or agitation, especially where it is necessary to avoid some of the older, better, known treatments. olanzapine causes fewer movement disorders than haloperidol and more than lorazepam. the value of the oro-dipersable velotab preparation is untested in trials. there is a need for well designed, conducted and reported randomised studies in this area. such studies are possible and, we argue, should be designed with the patient groups and clinicians in mind. they should report outcomes of relevance to the management of people at this difficult point in their illness.
we found no consistent evidence to confirm a beneficial effect of hyperbaric oxygen therapy for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and do not believe routine use is justified. the small number of analyses suggestive of benefit are isolated, difficult to ascribe with biological plausibility and would need to be confirmed in future well-designed trials. such trials are not, in our view, justified by this review.
for an individual with ra the potential benefits of celecoxib need to be balanced against the uncertainty that the short-term reduced incidence of upper gi complications are maintained in the long-term and its increased cost in comparison to traditional nsaids.
the conclusions of this updated review remain the same as those when it was first published. the review confirms the potential of cbt to address the adverse consequences of child sexual abuse, but highlights the limitations of the evidence base and the need for more carefully conducted and better reported trials.
there are limited data supporting the role of csfd in thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery for prevention of neurological injury. further clinical and experimental studies are indicated.
none of the objectives of this review could be adequately tested because of the lack of firm, randomised evidence. given the specific problems in the treatment of depressed elderly, a well designed randomised controlled trial should be conducted in which the efficacy of ect is compared to one or more antidepressants.
there are insufficient data about the effects of the current standard chlorproguanil-dapsone regimen (three-dose, 2 mg chlorproguanil). randomized controlled trials that follow up to day 28, record adverse events, and use an intention-to-treat analysis are required to inform any policy decisions. 2008: we do not plan to update this review because chlorproguanil-dapsone has been withdrawn (see the 'what's new' statement).
the effectiveness of the provision of hip protectors in reducing the incidence of hip fracture in older people is still not clearly established, although they may reduce the rate of hip fractures if made available to frail older people in nursing care. it remains unknown from studies identified to date if these findings apply to all types of hip protectors. some cluster-randomised trials have been associated with high risk of bias. poor acceptance and adherence by older people offered hip protectors have been key factors contributing to the continuing uncertainty.
there are insufficient data from randomised trials to guide practice regarding the management of dfm. based on the results of other systematic reviews of management strategies for women whose babies are thought to be at risk of compromise for various reasons, the following strategies show promise and may be prioritised for further research: doppler ultrasound studies, computerised cardiotocography, and fetal arousal to facilitate cardiotocography. for settings where electronic fetal assessment methods are not available, clinical fetal arousal tests should be investigated.
regular use of weekly oral doxycycline 200 mg increases the odds for nausea and vomiting with unclear benefit in reducing leptospira seroconversion or clinical consequences of infection.
comprehensive geriatric assessment increases a patient's likelihood of being alive and in their own home at up to 12 months.
no medication is effective for treatment of amphetamine withdrawal. amineptine showed reduction in discontinuation rates and improvement in clinical presentation compared to placebo, but had no effect on reducing withdrawal symptoms or craving. in spite of these limited benefits, amineptine is not available for use due to concerns over abuse liability when using the drug. the benefits of mirtazapine as a withdrawal agent are less clear based on findings from two randomised controlled trials: one report showed improvements in amphetamine withdrawal symptoms over placebo; a second report showed no differences in withdrawal symptoms compared to placebo. further potential treatment studies should examine medications that increase central nervous system activity involving dopamine, norepinephrine and/or serotonin neurotransmitters, including mirtazapine.
there are insufficient data to show that one method of tonsillectomy is superior. there is evidence that pain may be greater after monopolar dissection. large, well designed randomised controlled trials are necessary to determine the optimum method for tonsillectomy.
current evidence is insufficient to establish the role of scs in treating refractory cancer-related pain. future randomised studies should focus on the implantation of scs in patients with cancer-related pain.
no benefit of heparin, lmwhs or oral anticoagulants has been established for intermittent claudication. an increased risk of major bleeding events has been observed especially with oral anticoagulants. the use of anticoagulants for intermittent claudication cannot be recommended at this stage.
there is no evidence that tirilazad, in addition to nimodipine, reduces mortality or improves poor outcome in patients with aneurysmal sah.
there is insufficient evidence from trials testing the need for, and the extent and duration of, immobilisation to inform on the key conservative management decisions for treating hyperextension injuries of the proximal interphalangeal joints.
these results suggest that there is no evidence of a difference in the risk of ssi and wound dehiscence when staples rather than sutures are used to close leg wounds after vein graft harvesting during cabg, however more research is needed.
the main results of this review indicate that there are benefits to delivering brief interventions to heavy alcohol users admitted to general hospital wards in terms of reduction in alcohol consumption and death rates. however, these findings are based on studies involving mainly male participants. further research is required determine the optimal content and treatment exposure of brief interventions within general hospital settings and whether they are likely to be more successful in patients with certain characteristics.
a more vigorous review methodology was adopted in this update. the study of kragt 1997, reported in the previous version, was excluded because the snoezelen programme only consisted of three sessions, which was considered too brief for a therapeutic intervention. two new trials were reviewed. meta-analyses could not be performed because of the limited number of trials and different study methods of the available trials. overall, there is no evidence showing the efficacy of snoezelen for dementia. there is a need for more reliable and sound research-based evidence to inform and justify the use of snoezelen in dementia care.
there is a trend for evidence that corticosteroids of dose range six to 16 mg dexamethasone given intravenously may bring about the resolution of bowel obstruction. equally, the incidence of side effects in all the included studies is extremely low. corticosteroids do not seem to affect the length of survival of these patients. since the last version of this review, no new studies have been conducted. no new studies have been identified for this update and the conclusions are not altered.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend any specific sperm retrieval technique for azoospermic men undergoing icsi. in the absence of evidence to support more invasive or more technically difficult methods, the review authors recommend the least invasive and simplest technique available. further randomised trials are warranted, preferably multi-centred trials. the classification of azoospermia as obstructive and non-obstructive appears to be relevant to a successful clinical outcome and a distinction according to the cause of azoospermia is important for future clinical trials.
antibiotics are likely to be beneficial in the treatment of children with chronic moist cough. this evidence is however limited by study quality, study design and sensitivity analysis data. the use of antibiotics however has to be balanced against their well known adverse events. further well-designed rcts using valid cough outcome measures are needed to answer this question conclusively.
we were unable to achieve all of the objectives specified for the review. this review shows that the overall effect of cfx (administered as intensive schedule) in the treatment of progressive ms does not support its use in clinical practice.
this review suggests that there is only weak evidence for the effectiveness of any of the treatments for oral elp, whilst no evidence was found for genital elp. more rcts on a larger scale are needed in the oral and genital elp populations. we suggest that future studies should have standardised outcome variables that are clinically important to affected individuals. we recommend the measurement of a clinical severity score and a participant-rated symptom score using agreed and validated severity scoring tools. we also recommend the development of a validated combined severity scoring tool for both oral and genital populations.
the role of pancreatic enzymes for abdominal pain, weight loss, steatorrhoea, analgesic use and quality of life in patients with chronic pancreatitis remains equivocal. good quality, adequately powered studies are much warranted.
this analysis shows a significant increase in survival attributable to pre-operative chemotherapy. this is currently the best estimate of the effectiveness of this therapy, but is based on a small number of trials and patients. this analysis was unable to address important questions such as whether particular types of patients may benefit more or less from pre-operative chemotherapy or whether the early stopping of a number of included rcts impacted on the results. these issues may be addressed by an ongoing individual patient data (ipd) meta-analysis.
despite the importance of encouraging fruit and vegetable consumption among children aged five years and under, this review identified few randomised controlled trials investigating interventions to achieve this.
there is some evidence to support the effectiveness of brief, focused mdrps for cancer survivors. rigorous and methodologically sound clinical trials that include an economic analysis are required.
alitretinoin gel is effective in treating cutaneous ks, pld is effective treatment for advanced ks and radiotherapy appears effective in treating cutaneous lesions. apart from the trial of radiotherapy no trials applicable to developing settings were identified.
hospital birth centres are associated with lower rates of medical interventions during labour and birth and higher levels of satisfaction, without increasing risk to mothers or babies.
there is insufficient, consistent evidence to either support or refute the use of hyaluronate for treating patients with tmd. further high quality rcts of hyaluronate need to be conducted before firm conclusions with regard to its effectiveness can be drawn.
there is not enough evidence to globally support the efficacy of phlebotonics for chronic venous insufficiency. there is a suggestion of some efficacy of phlebotonics on oedema but this is of uncertain clinical relevance. due to the limitations of current evidence, there is a need for further randomised, controlled clinical trials with greater attention paid to methodological quality.
firm evidence of the positive effects of slt for children with cerebral palsy has not been demonstrated by this review. however, positive trends in communication change were shown. no change in practice is recommended from this updated review. further research is needed to describe this client group, and its possible clinical subgroups, and the methods of treatment currently used in slt. research is also needed to investigate the effectiveness of new and established interventions and their acceptability to families. rigour in research practice needs to be extended to enable firm associations between therapy and the communication change to be made. there are now sufficient data to develop randomised controlled studies of dysarthria interventions and group parent training programmes. such research is urgently needed to ensure clinically effective provision for this group of children, who are at severe risk of social and educational exclusion.
there are insufficient data to identify a difference in outcome between supportive therapy and standard care. there are several outcomes, including hospitalisation and general mental state, indicating advantages for other psychological therapies over supportive therapy but these findings are based on a few small studies. future research would benefit from larger trials that use supportive therapy as the main treatment arm rather than the comparator.
there is no sufficient evidence to date to recommend pre and peri-operative erythropoietin use in colorectal cancer surgery.
this review does not provide evidence of the effectiveness of home-based interventions that are specifically targeted at improving developmental outcomes for preschool children from socially disadvantaged families. future studies should endeavour to better document and report their methodological processes.
mass media interventions have immediate and overall effects in promotion of hiv testing. no long-term effects were seen. there was no significant impact of detecting seropositive status after mass media intervention for promoting hiv testing, and this finding was limited to a small number of studies. further research is required to identify possible effects on seropositivity status after mass media intervention for promotion of hiv testing among high-risk groups in epidemic countries. additional research is needed to identify the effectiveness of different types of mass media interventions, the cost effectiveness of the interventions, and characteristics of messages.
there is no evidence of relevant differences in mortality, morbidity and survival between the two operations. given obvious clinical and methodological heterogeneity, future research must be undertaken to perform high-quality randomised controlled trials of complex surgical interventions on the basis of well-defined outcome parameters.
overall, there has been very little good-quality research on treatments for bowen's disease. there is limited evidence from single studies to suggest mal-pdt is an effective treatment. although cosmetic outcomes appear favourable with pdt, five-year follow-up data are needed. significantly more lesions cleared with mal-pdt compared to cryotherapy. no significant difference in clearance was seen when mal-pdt was compared with 5-fu, but one study found a significant difference in clearance in favour of ala-pdt when compared to 5-fu. there was no significant difference in clearance when cryotherapy was compared to 5-fu. the lack of quality data for surgery and topical cream therapies has limited the scope of this review to one largely about pdt studies. the age group, number, and size of lesions and site(s) affected may all influence therapeutic choice; however, there was not enough evidence available to provide guidance on this. more studies are required in the immunosuppressed populations as different therapeutic options may be preferable. specific recommendations cannot be made from the data in this review, so we cannot give firm conclusions about the comparative effectiveness of treatments.
the lack of evidence for prevention of visual impairment and blindness should not be interpreted to mean that ivermectin is not effective, however, clearly this is a key question that remains unanswered. the main evidence for a protective effect of mass treatment with ivermectin on visual field loss and optic nerve disease comes from communities mesoendemic for the savannah strain of o.volvulus. whether these findings can be applied to communities with different endemicity and affected by the forest strain is unclear. serious adverse effects were rarely reported. none of the studies, however, were conducted in areas where people are infected with loa loa (loiasis).
the combination of gentamicin and clindamycin is appropriate for the treatment of endometritis. regimens with activity against penicillin-resistant anaerobic bacteria are better than those without. there is no evidence that any one regimen is associated with fewer side-effects. once uncomplicated endometritis has clinically improved with intravenous therapy, oral therapy is not needed. [note: the two citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
these formats of delivering behavioural interventions for carers of children are worth considering in clinical practice. media-based interventions may, in some cases, be enough to make clinically significant changes in a child's behaviour, and may reduce the amount of time primary care workers have to devote to each case. they can also be used as the first stage of a stepped care approach. consequently this would increase the number of families who could possibly benefit from these types of intervention, releasing clinician time that can be reallocated to more complex cases. media-based therapies would therefore appear to have both clinical and economic implications as regards the treatment of children with behavioural problems.
no studies have compared tap block with other analgesics such as epidural analgesia or local anaesthetic infiltration into the abdominal wound. there is only limited evidence to suggest use of perioperative tap block reduces opioid consumption and pain scores after abdominal surgery when compared with no intervention or placebo. there is no apparent reduction in postoperative nausea and vomiting or sedation from the small numbers of studies to date. many relevant studies are currently underway or awaiting publication.
a small but significant effect of psychotherapy on improving mood and preventing depression was identified. more evidence is required before recommendations can be made about the routine use of such treatments after stroke.
evidence was insufficient to allow review authors to conclude that statin use resulted in either a reduction or an increase in any of the outcomes examined. the existing body of evidence leaves questions about the benefits of perioperative use of statins for vascular surgery unanswered. widespread use of statins in the target population means that it may now be difficult for researchers to undertake the large rcts needed to demonstrate any effect on the incidence of postoperative cardiovascular events. however, participant-reported outcomes have been neglected and warrant further study.
there is very little evidence that cholinesterase inhibitors affect progression to dementia or cognitive test scores in mild cognitive impairment. this weak evidence is overwhelmed by the increased risk of adverse events, particularly gastrointestinal. cholinesterase inhibitors should not be recommended for mild cognitive impairment.
rcts included in this review suggest that steroids placed inside the eye by either intravitreal injection or surgical implantation may improve visual outcomes in eyes with persistent or refractory dme. since the studies in our report focused on chronic or refractory dme, the question arises whether intravitreal steroids therapy could be of value in other stages of dme, especially the earlier stages either as standalone therapy or in combination with other therapies, such as laser photocoagulation.
data suggest tricyclic drugs are not useful in treating depression in children. there is marginal evidence to support the use of tricyclic drugs in the treatment of depression in adolescents.
the findings of this review tentatively suggest that flexible working interventions that increase worker control and choice (such as self-scheduling or gradual/partial retirement) are likely to have a positive effect on health outcomes. in contrast, interventions that were motivated or dictated by organisational interests, such as fixed-term contract and involuntary part-time employment, found equivocal or negative health effects. given the partial and methodologically limited evidence base these findings should be interpreted with caution. moreover, there is a clear need for well-designed intervention studies to delineate the impact of flexible working conditions on health, wellbeing and health inequalities.
there was insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of single volume exchange transfusion as opposed to double volume exchange transfusion in jaundiced newborns. a change from the current practice of double volume exchange transfusions for severe jaundice in newborns infant, cannot be recommended on current evidence.
the published evidence shows fistula surgery with abscess drainage significantly reduces recurrence or persistence of abscess/fistula, or the need for repeat surgery. there was no statistically significant evidence of incontinence following fistula surgery with abscess drainage. this intervention may be recommended in carefully selected patients.
definitive recommendations cannot be made since evidence is only available from one randomised controlled trial which, though of reasonable quality had a number of limitations. there is currently no evidence to support second-line treatment of patients with poor performance status. larger, well-designed controlled trials are needed to further evaluate whether the benefits of second-line chemotherapy to patients with non-small cell lung cancer outweigh its risks and costs.
this review has found limited evidence from individual rcts to support some of the existing interventions (corticosteroid and pdl) for infantile haemangiomas. there is a need for further high-quality rcts to validate the findings from these studies, and rcts to assess the effect of other treatments, in particular relating to propranolol.
interventions that promote hand washing can reduce diarrhoea episodes by about one-third. this significant reduction is comparable to the effect of providing clean water in low-income areas. however, trials with longer follow up and that test different methods of promoting hand washing are needed.
dilation and evacuation is superior to instillation of prostaglandin f2 α. the current evidence also appears to favour d&e over mifepristone and misoprostol, however larger randomised trials are needed.
intermittent iron supplementation in menstruating women is a feasible intervention in settings where daily supplementation is likely to be unsuccessful or not possible. in comparison with daily supplementation, the provision of iron supplements intermittently is less effective in preventing or controlling anaemia. more information is needed on morbidity (including malaria outcomes), side effects, work performance, economic productivity, depression and adherence to the intervention.
dexamethasone may have some benefits compared with betamethasone such as less intraventricular haemorrhage, although perhaps a higher rate of nicu admission (seen in only one trial). apart from a suggestion from another small trial that the intramuscular route may have advantages over an oral route for dexamethasone, few other conclusions about optimal antenatal corticosteroid regimens were able to be made. trials of commonly used corticosteroids are most urgently needed, followed by trials of dosages and other variations in regimens.
although complex interventions consisting of patient education combined with personalised behavioural change interventions, including tailoring daily routines to promote adherence to eye drops, may improve adherence to glaucoma medication, overall there is insufficient evidence to recommend a particular intervention. the interventions varied between studies and none of the included studies reported on the cost of the intervention. simplified drug regimens also could be of benefit but again the current published studies do not provide conclusive evidence. future studies should follow up for at least one year, and could benefit from standardised outcomes.
there is little evidence about the effects of most types of biomedical tests for risk assessment on smoking cessation. of the fifteen included studies, only two detected a significant effect of the intervention. spirometry combined with an interpretation of the results in terms of 'lung age' had a significant effect in a single good quality trial but the evidence is not optimal. a trial of carotid plaque screening using ultrasound also detected a significant effect, but a second larger study of a similar feedback mechanism did not detect evidence of an effect. only two pairs of studies were similar enough in terms of recruitment, setting, and intervention to allow meta-analyses; neither of these found evidence of an effect. mixed quality evidence does not support the hypothesis that other types of biomedical risk assessment increase smoking cessation in comparison to standard treatment. there is insufficient evidence with which to evaluate the hypothesis that multiple types of assessment are more effective than single forms of assessment.
the optimal prophylaxis in colorectal surgery is the combination of graduated compression stockings and low-dose unfractionated heparin. the unfractionated heparin can be replaced with low molecular weight heparin.
the results should be interpreted with caution due to few studies with small sample sizes and high risk of bias. botulinum toxin a injections seem to reduce pain severity and improve shoulder function and range of motion when compared with placebo in patients with shoulder pain due to spastic hemiplegia or arthritis. it is unclear if the benefit of pain relief in post-stroke shoulder pain at three to six months but not at one month is due to limitations of the evidence, which includes small sample sizes with imprecise estimates, or a delayed onset of action. more studies with safety data are needed.
contrary to continued use in some clinical areas, we found no evidence of benefit for the use of the admission cardiotocograph (ctg) for low-risk women on admission in labour. we found no evidence of benefit for the use of the admission ctg for low-risk women on admission in labour. furthermore, the probability is that admission ctg increases the caesarean section rate by approximately 20%. the data lacked power to detect possible important differences in perinatal mortality. however, it is unlikely that any trial, or meta-analysis, will be adequately powered to detect such differences. the findings of this review support recommendations that the admission ctg not be used for women who are low risk on admission in labour. women should be informed that admission ctg is likely associated with an increase in the incidence of caesarean section without evidence of benefit.
the results demonstrate improved medical outcomes when treated by a provider with more training/expertise in hiv/aids care in the outpatient (clinic) setting. since all of these studies were conducted in north america, this does not address any issues regarding the level of training/expertise required by providers working in countries with more limited resources. practitioners who do not consider themselves 'experts' in hiv/aids care and care for few of these patients need to seriously consider this review which demonstrates a trend towards worse patient outcomes when receiving care by those with low caseloads/training in hiv/aids care.
previous trials have shown that conjugate pneumococcal vaccines are safe and effective in normal healthy individuals, including those under the age of two years. the controlled trials included in this review have demonstrated immunogenicity (the ability to induce the body's immune response, without which there is no protection) of these vaccines, and observational studies in people with sickle cell disease support these findings. we therefore recommend that conjugate pneumococcal vaccines are used in people with sickle cell disease. randomised trials in people with sickle cell disease will be needed to determine the optimal vaccination regimen when further, potentially more effective vaccines become available. such trials should measure clinical outcomes of effectiveness. the trials included in this review were published between 1983 and 2003. we have not identified any further relevant trials up to december 2011. we therefore do not plan to update this review until new trials are published.
phonics training appears to be effective for improving some reading skills. specifically, statistically significant effects were found for nonword reading accuracy (large effect), word reading accuracy (moderate effect), and letter-sound knowledge (small-to-moderate effect). for several other outcomes, there were small or moderate effect sizes that did not reach statistical significance but may be meaningful: word reading fluency, spelling, phonological output, and reading comprehension. the effect for nonword reading fluency, which was measured in only one study, was in a negative direction, but this was not statistically significant. future studies of phonics training need to improve the reporting of procedures used for random sequence generation, allocation concealment, and blinding of participants, personnel, and outcome assessment.
there is insufficient evidence to determine the role of body positioning on apnoea, bradycardia, oxygen desaturation and oxygen saturation. large randomised controlled trials are needed to determine the effect of body positioning on cardiorespiratory function in spontaneously breathing preterm infants.
a single trial of methotrexate 12.5 mg orally weekly showed no benefit over placebo in remission induction in patients with active ulcerative colitis. there is no evidence on which to base recommendations for treating ulcerative colitis patients with methotrexate. however, the possibility of a type 2 error exists, and a higher dose of methotrexate may be effective. a new trial in which adequate numbers of patients are randomized to placebo or a higher dose of methotrexate should be considered.
tegaserod appears to improve the overall symptomatology of ibs, and the frequency of bowel movements in those with chronic constipation. the clinical importance of these modest improvements is not clear. there are currently few data on its effect on quality of life. in addition, more information is needed about its efficacy in men. it would also be of interest to know whether treatment with tegaserod leads either directly, or indirectly, to changes in visceral sensitivity or psychopathology, which are also considered important in the pathophysiology of these conditions.
there is currently little evidence for the efficacy of homeopathy for the treatment of adhd. development of optimal treatment protocols is recommended prior to further randomised controlled trials being undertaken.
the thienopyridine derivatives are at least as effective as aspirin in preventing serious vascular events in patients at high risk, and possibly somewhat more so. however, the size of any additional benefit is uncertain and could be negligible. clopidogrel has a more favourable adverse effects profile than ticlopidine and so is the thienopyridine of choice. it should be used as an alternative to aspirin in patients genuinely intolerant of or allergic to aspirin.
there is currently insufficient evidence to support the routine prescription of antidepressants as analgesics in patients with ra as no reliable conclusions about their efficacy can be drawn from eight placebo rcts. the use of these agents may be associated with adverse events which are generally mild and do not lead to cessation of treatment. more high quality trials are needed in this area.
for ventilated preterm infants with evidence of asynchronous respiratory effort, neuromuscular paralysis with pancuronium seems to have a favourable effect on intraventricular haemorrhage and possibly on pneumothorax. however, uncertainty remains regarding the long-term pulmonary and neurologic effects and the safety of prolonged use of pancuronium in ventilated newborn infants. there is no evidence from randomised trials on the effects of neuromuscular blocking agents other than pancuronium. the routine use of pancuronium or any other neuromuscular blocking agent in ventilated newborn infants cannot be recommended based on current evidence.
there was insufficient evidence to recommend a particular antibiotic regimen for the treatment of nec. there were concerns about adverse effects following the usage of clindamycin, related to the development of strictures. to address this issue a large randomised controlled trial needs to be performed.
the limited available data do not provide convincing evidence that feeding preterm infants with multinutrient fortified breast milk compared with unfortified breast milk following hospital discharge affects important outcomes including growth rates during infancy. there are no data on long-term growth. since fortifying breast milk for infants fed directly from the breast is logistically difficult and has the potential to interfere with breast feeding, it is important to determine if mothers would support further trials of this intervention.
the sparse data and high risk of bias preclude us from drawing any definite conclusion on lifestyle programme or orlistat for treatment of nafld. further randomised clinical trials with low risk of bias are needed to test the beneficial and harmful effects of weight reduction for nafld patients. the long-term prognosis of development of fibrosis, mortality, and quality of life should be studied.
in the management of rheumatoid arthritis, the concurrent use of nsaids with methotrexate appears to be safe provided appropriate monitoring is performed. the use of anti-inflammatory doses of aspirin should be avoided.
prophylactic antibiotics did reduce the risk of bacteriuria after urodynamic studies but there was not enough evidence to suggest that this effect reduced symptomatic urinary tract infections. there was no statistically significant difference in the risk of fever, dysuria or adverse reactions. potential benefits have to be weighed against clinical and financial implications, and the risk of adverse effects.
for people with acute isshl, the application of hbot significantly improved hearing, but the clinical significance remains unclear. we could not assess the effect of hbot on tinnitus by pooled analysis. in view of the modest number of patients, methodological shortcomings and poor reporting, this result should be interpreted cautiously. an appropriately powered trial is justified to define those patients (if any) who can be expected to derive most benefit from hbot. there is no evidence of a beneficial effect of hbot on chronic isshl or tinnitus and we do not recommend the use of hbot for this purpose.
primary endocrine therapy should only be offered to women with oestrogen receptor (er) positive tumours who are unfit for or who refuse surgery. in a cohort of women with significant co-morbid disease and er-positive tumours it is possible that primary endocrine therapy may be a superior option to surgery. trials are needed to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of aromatase inhibitors as primary therapy for an infirm older population with er-positive tumours.
the low methodological quality of the included studies means that results must be considered with caution. no adverse effects were reported. nevertheless, although some studies find that the intervention had favourable effects for some outcomes, overall the studies show clinically-equivalent results between tfu and control groups. in summary, we cannot conclude that tfu is an effective intervention.
the use of a medium dose of long-acting fsh is a safe treatment option and equally effective compared to daily fsh. further research is needed to determine if long-acting fsh is safe and effective for use in hyper- or poor responders and in women with all causes of subfertility.
nimodipine can be of some benefit in the treatment of patients with features of dementia due to unclassified disease or to alzheimer's disease, cerebrovascular disease, or mixed alzheimer's and cerebrovascular disease. it appears to be well tolerated with few side effects. data were not available from several trials, a total of more than 500 patients. a meta-analysis of individual patient data from all trials is desirable. dementia is a chronic disorder and the short-term benefits of nimodipine demonstrated in the trials reviewed do not justify its use as a long-term anti-dementia drug. new research must focus on longer term outcomes.
touch therapies may have a modest effect in pain relief. more studies on ht and reiki in relieving pain are needed. more studies including children are also required to evaluate the effect of touch on children.
there is limited evidence on which to base clinical decisions regarding the use of non-drug therapies for the treatment of lower limb muscle cramp. serious methodological limitations in the existing evidence hinder clinical application. there is an urgent need to carefully evaluate many of the commonly recommended and emerging non-drug therapies in well designed randomised controlled trials.
in the medium to long term laser photocoagulation of cnv slows the progression of visual loss in people with neovascular amd. however, it is associated with an increased risk of visual loss immediately after treatment and this period may be longer in people with subfoveal amd. with the advent of modern pharmacological therapies, and concern for the impact of iatrogenic scotoma in subfoveal cnv, laser photocoagulation of subfoveal cnv is not recommended. no studies have compared photocoagulation with modern pharmacological agents for amd for non-subfoveal cnv.
enac blockers do not have a statistically or clinically significant bp lowering effect at low doses but trials at higher doses are not available. the review did not provide a good estimate of the incidence of harms associated with enac blockers.
due to the possible unreliability of some of the included studies, it is uncertain whether or not coenzyme q10 reduces blood pressure in the long-term management of primary hypertension.
robot assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomy does not seem to offer any significant advantages over human assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomy. however, all trials had a high risk of systematic errors or bias (that is, risk of overestimation of benefit and underestimation of harm). all trials were small, with few or no outcomes. hence, the risk of random errors (that is, play of chance) is high. further randomised trials with low risk of bias or random errors are needed.
in this meta-analysis, preventive antibiotic therapy seemed to reduce the risk of infection, but did not reduce the number of dependent or deceased patients. however, the included studies were small and heterogeneous. large randomised trials are urgently needed.
although specialist nurse counselling interventions might provide benefit for ibd patients the one included study was of low quality and the results of this study should be interpreted with caution. higher quality trials of gastroenterology and ibd specialist nursing interventions are needed to assess the impact of specialist nursing interventions on the care and management of patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
there is evidence that walking and upright positions in the first stage of labour reduce the length of labour and do not seem to be associated with increased intervention or negative effects on mothers' and babies' wellbeing. women should be encouraged to take up whatever position they find most comfortable in the first stage of labour.
overall, the results of this review do not justify the use of hdc with scr as a standard therapy for children with metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma. however, all reported studies were possibly subject to significant bias, especially selection bias. this might have underestimated the measured effect of hdc. as a result, a clinically important excess of adverse risk patients in the hdc arms may explain the non-beneficial effect of hdc. only a large prospective rct will be able to answer the question of whether hdc with scr adds to survival or not definitively.
there is currently insufficient information to evaluate the effectiveness of prophylactic nasal cpap in very preterm infants. neither of the included studies reviewed showed evidence of benefit in reducing the use of ippv. the tendency for some adverse outcomes to be increased is of concern and further multicentre randomized controlled trials are needed to clarify this.
no practice recommendation can be made based on the available evidence regarding the use of propofol in neonates. further research is needed on the pharmacokinetics of propofol in neonates and once a relatively safe dose is identified, randomised controlled trials assessing the safety and efficacy of propofol are needed.
the number of women included in each of the comparisons is small and therefore, although no differences were detected between the different antibiotic regimens, the trials were limited in their ability to detect important but modest differences. for women who are allergic to penicillin, this review provides some reassurance that treatment with ceftriaxone or spectinomycin appears to have similar effectiveness in producing microbiological cure. [note: the one citation in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the available evidence suggests that duloxetine treatment can significantly improve the quality of life of patients with stress urinary incontinence, but it is unclear whether or not benefits are sustainable. adverse effects are common but not serious. about one in three participants allocated duloxetine reported adverse effects (most commonly nausea) related to treatment, and about one in eight allocated duloxetine stopped treatment as a consequence.
the single trial performed was too small to determine whether individualized moderate intensity endurance type exercises for the trunk and limbs are beneficial or harmful. no other medical, surgical or alternative treatment and therapy has been evaluated in a randomized fashion in this patient population. more research is needed.
based on the available evidence, we conclude that adrenal insufficiency commonly occurs in the first days after cessation of glucocorticoid therapy for childhood all, but the exact duration is unclear. since no data on the level of the hypothalamus and the pituitary were available we cannot make any conclusions regarding those outcomes. clinicians should consider prescribing glucocorticoid replacement therapy during periods of serious stress in the first weeks after cessation of glucocorticoid therapy for childhood all, to reduce the risk of life-threatening complications. however, more high-quality research is needed for evidence-based guidelines for glucocorticoid replacement therapy. special attention should be paid to patients receiving fluconazole therapy, and perhaps similar antifungal drugs, as this may prolong the duration of adrenal insufficiency.
traditional slings seem to be as effective as minimally invasive slings, but had higher rates of adverse effects. this should be interpreted with some caution however, as the quality of evidence for the studies was variable, follow-up short and populations small, particularly for identifying complication rates. tradional sling procedures appeared to confer a similar cure rate in comparison to open retropubic colposuspension, but the long term adverse event profile is still unclear. reliable evidence to clarify whether or not traditional suburethral slings may be better or worse than other surgical or conservative management options is lacking.
the systematic review demonstrated improved os for patients with indolent lymphoma, particularly in the subgroups of follicular and in mantle cell lymphoma when treated with r-chemo compared to chemotherapy alone.
there was no evidence of an effect on reproductive outcomes in any of the four included trials. further rcts of management of endometrioma in women undergoing art are required.
this review provides no convincing evidence of the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for the prevention of disability following traumatic physical injury. taken together, our findings cannot be considered as supporting the provision of psychosocial interventions to prevent aspects of disability arising from physical injury. however, these conclusions are based on a small number of disparate trials with small to moderate sample sizes and are therefore necessarily cautious. more research, using larger sample sizes, and similar interventions and patient populations to enable pooling of results, is needed before these findings can be confirmed.
there is evidence that occupational therapy has a positive effect on functional ability in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
current evidence suggests that male circumcision may be protective among msm who practice primarily insertive anal sex, but the role of male circumcision overall in the prevention of hiv and other sexually transmitted infections among msm remains to be determined. therefore, there is not enough evidence to recommend male circumcision for hiv prevention among msm at present. further research should be of high quality and further explore interaction with the predominant sexual role.
current evidence indicates that compared to no medication, betamethasone did not reduce the risk of neonatal thrombocytopenia and neonatal bleeding in itp during pregnancy. there is insufficient evidence to support the use of betamethasone for treating itp. this cohrane review does not provide evidence about other medical treatments for itp during pregnancy. this systematic review also identifies the need for well-designed, adequately powered randomised clinical trials for this medical condition during pregnancy. unless randomised clinical trials provide evidence of a treatment effect and the trade off between potential benefits and harms are established, policy-makers, clinicians, and academics should not use betamethasone for itp in pregnant women. any future trials on medical treatments for treating itp during pregnancy should test a variety of important maternal, neonatal or both outcome measures, including maternal death, perinatal mortality, postpartum haemorrhage and neonatal intracranial haemorrhage.
studies to date have involved small numbers of patients and the quality of evidence is generally low. the current evidence shows that moit can lead to desensitization in the majority of individuals with imcma although the development of long-term tolerance has not been established. a major drawback of moit is the frequency of adverse effects, although most are mild and self-limited. the use of parenteral epinephrine is not infrequent. because there are no standardized protocols, guidelines would be required prior to incorporating desensitization into clinical practice.
the major limitations are the lack of replication of the findings and sufficiently large trials. there is moderate evidence for the benefit of intravenous methylprednisolone given within eight hours of acute whiplash, from a single trial. lidocaine injection into myofascial trigger points appears effective in two trials. there is moderate evidence that botulinum toxin a is not superior to saline injection for chronic mnd. muscle relaxants, analgesics and nsaids had limited evidence and unclear benefits.
evidence that massage for preterm infants is of benefit for developmental outcomes is weak and does not warrant wider use of preterm infant massage. where massage is currently provided by nurses, consideration should be given as to whether this is a cost-effective use of time. future research should assess the effects of massage interventions on clinical outcome measures, such as medical complications or length of stay, and on process-of-care outcomes, such as care-giver or parental satisfaction.
early repeated csf tapping cannot be recommended for neonates at risk of, or actually developing, post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus.
our review provides some evidence of the effectiveness of slt for people with aphasia following stroke in terms of improved functional communication, receptive and expressive language. however, some trials were poorly reported. the potential benefits of intensive slt over conventional slt were confounded by a significantly higher dropout from intensive slt. more participants also withdrew from social support than slt interventions. there was insufficient evidence to draw any conclusion regarding the effectiveness of any one specific slt approach over another.
in adults, formoterol was similar to short-acting beta2-agonists when used as a reliever, and showed a reduction in the number of exacerbations requiring a course of oral corticosteroids. clinicians should weigh the relatively modest benefits of formoterol as-needed against the benefits of single inhaler therapy and the potential danger of long-term use of long-acting beta2-agonists in some patients. we did not find evidence to recommend changes to guidelines that suggest that long-acting beta2-agonists should be given only to patients already taking inhaled corticosteroids. there was insufficient information reported from children in the included trials to come to any conclusion on the safety or efficacy of formoterol as relief medication for children with asthma.
there is currently insufficient evidence from rcts to support the use of the oral cholera vaccine dukoral® for protecting travellers against etec diarrhoea. further research is needed to develop safe and effective vaccines to provide both short and long-term protection against etec diarrhoea.
this systematic review shows that there is insufficient evidence in support of either early or late initiation of art. for the moment, because of the high risk of immune reconstitution syndrome in patients with cryptococcal meningitis, we recommend that art initiation should be delayed until there is evidence of a sustained clinical response to antifungal therapy. however, large studies with appropriate comparison groups, and adequate follow-up are warranted to provide the evidence base for effective decision making.
we have not shown that hypnotherapy has a greater effect on six-month quit rates than other interventions or no treatment. there is not enough evidence to show whether hypnotherapy could be as effective as counselling treatment. the effects of hypnotherapy on smoking cessation claimed by uncontrolled studies were not confirmed by analysis of randomized controlled trials.
there is a lack of evidence about the comparative effectiveness of the different denture cleaning methods considered in this review. few well designed rcts were found. future research should focus on comparisons between mechanical and chemical methods; the assessment of the association of methods, primary variables and costs should also receive future attention.
this review confirms the benefit of adding radiotherapy to breast conserving surgery for the treatment of all women diagnosed with dcis. no long-term toxicity from use of radiotherapy was identified.
the current limited evidence demonstrates the efficacy of clobetasol propionate, mometasone furoate, and pimecrolimus in treating genital lichen sclerosus. further rcts are needed to determine the optimal potency and regimen of topical corticosteroids, examine other topical interventions, assess the duration of remission or prevention of flares, evaluate the reduction in the risk of genital squamous cell carcinoma or genital intraepithelial neoplasia, and examine the efficacy in improving the quality of the sex lives of people with this condition.
anti-tuberculous therapy may be effective in maintaining remission in patients with crohn's disease when remission has been induced with corticosteroids combined with anti-tuberculous therapy. however, the results which support this conclusion come from a subgroup of only two trials with small numbers of patients and should be interpreted with caution. use of this therapy cannot be recommended on the basis of this evidence.
for transcervical cvs, although there is some evidence to support the use of small forceps instead of cannulae, the evidence is not strong enough to support change in practice for clinicians who have become familiar with a particular technique. for transabdominal cvs, based on current evidence, there is no difference in clinically important outcomes with the use of a continuous compared with a discontinuous negative pressure needle aspiration system.
results of these four studies show that evidence to support or refute the efficacy of selenium supplementation in people with hashimoto's thyroiditis is incomplete. the current level of evidence for the efficacy of selenium supplementation in the management of people with hashimoto's thyroiditis is based on four randomised controlled trials assessed at unclear to high risk of bias; this does not at present allow confident decision making about the use of selenium supplementation for hashimoto's thyroiditis. this review highlights the need for randomised placebo-controlled trials to evaluate the effects of selenium in people with hashimoto's thyroiditis and can ultimately provide reliable evidence to help inform clinical decision making.
prophylactic intratracheal administration of animal derived surfactant extract to infants judged to be at risk of developing respiratory distress syndrome has been demonstrated to improve clinical outcome. infants who receive prophylactic animal derived surfactant extract have a decreased risk of pneumothorax, a decreased risk of pie, a decreased risk of mortality, and a decreased risk of bpd or death.
in patients already diagnosed with clinically probable or definite als, creatine at doses ranging from 5 to 10 g per day did not have a statistically significant effect on survival, alsfrs-r progression or percent predicted fvc progression.
since the last version of this review no new studies were found. however there is one ongoing, high quality study that has not reached full recruitment. there are insufficient good quality studies to make any recommendations for practice with regard to the use of medically assisted hydration in palliative care patients.
data from good quality randomised controlled trials show benefit of nppv as first line intervention as an adjunct therapy to usual medical care in all suitable patients for the management of respiratory failure secondary to an acute exacerbation of copd. nppv should be considered early in the course of respiratory failure and before severe acidosis ensues, as a means of reducing the likelihood of endotracheal intubation, treatment failure and mortality.
with the current evidence, we found that the administration of intravenous insulin with the objective of maintaining serum glucose within a specific range in the first hours of acute ischaemic stroke does not provide benefit in terms of functional outcome, death, or improvement in final neurological deficit and significantly increased the number of hypoglycaemic episodes. specifically, those who were maintained within a more tight range of glycaemia with intravenous insulin experienced a greater risk of symptomatic and asymptomatic hypoglycaemia than those individuals in the control group.
the studies in this review compared loading doses in several different situations. there is still considerable uncertainty between the use of a 5 mg and a 10 mg loading dose for the initiation of warfarin. in the elderly, there is some evidence that lower initiation doses or age adjusted doses are more appropriate, leading to fewer high inrs. however, there is insufficient evidence to warrant genotype guided initiation.
pregabalin seems to have similar tolerability but inferior efficacy in comparison to lamotrigine for newly diagnosed partial seizures. however, considering the limitations in the study design (such as the short-term follow-up and the low initial target dose selection), the results should be interpreted with caution. the available data were too limited to draw any conclusions between pregabalin and gabapentin. the result indicated that the treatment effects were influenced by the study regions. the clinical disadvantage of pregabalin was more prominent in asia when compared with lamotrigine. we should determine whether pregabalin has ethnic differences in the treatment of epilepsy in the future. this review does not inform any treatment policy for patients with generalized onset tonic-clonic seizures. further long-term trials are needed to investigate the genuine effectiveness of pregabalin as monotherapy.
no specific approach can be recommended from this review. it is unclear why 'treatment as usual' performed so poorly, or why dietary advice alone appeared so unacceptable, as the reasons for non-completion were not reported. there is an urgent need for large well-designed trials in this area.
the results provide clear and reliable evidence that home palliative care increases the chance of dying at home and reduces symptom burden in particular for patients with cancer, without impacting on caregiver grief. this justifies providing home palliative care for patients who wish to die at home. more work is needed to study cost-effectiveness especially for people with non-malignant conditions, assessing place of death and appropriate outcomes that are sensitive to change and valid in these populations, and to compare different models of home palliative care, in powered studies.
limited evidence exists that feeding preterm infants with ad libitum or demand/semi-demand regimens allows earlier attainment of full oral feeding and earlier hospital discharge. this finding should be interpreted cautiously because of methodological weaknesses in the included trials. a large randomised controlled trial is needed to confirm this finding and to determine if ad libitum of demand/semi-demand feeding of preterm infants affects other clinically important outcomes.
it was disappointing that only three trials that compared three different types of materials were suitable for inclusion into this review. there were no significant differences found in all three trials for all of the outcomes assessed. well designed, randomised controlled trials comparing the different types of filling materials for similar outcomes are urgently needed in dentistry. there was insufficient evidence from the three included trials to make any recommendations about which filling material to use.
there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of telemedicine technology to support the parents of high-risk newborn infants receiving intensive care. clinical trials are needed to assess the application of telemedicine to support parents and families of infants in nicu with length of hospital stay and their perception of nicu care as the major outcomes.
glp-1 agonists are effective in improving glycaemic control.
since the last version of this review no new relevant studies have been identified. the combination of dextropropoxyphene 65 mg with paracetamol 650 mg shows similar efficacy to tramadol 100 mg for single dose studies in postoperative pain but with a lower incidence of adverse effects. the same dose of paracetamol combined with 60 mg codeine appears more effective but, with the slight overlap in the 95% ci, this conclusion is not robust. adverse effects of both combinations were similar. ibuprofen 400 mg has a lower (better) nnt than both dextropropoxyphene 65 mg plus paracetamol 650 mg and tramadol 100 mg.
there is no high quality evidence that ek is superior to pkp in the treatment of fed considering the studies that satisfied our primary and secondary outcome measures. one rct demonstrated that hoas are lower following ek and some lower quality evidence suggests that endothelial rejection episodes may be less with ek. these findings should be interpreted with caution as they are based on data with risk of biases. further rcts of visual and refractive outcomes needs to be performed in this field, comparing ek to pkp, with a larger sample size and at least five years of follow up. to avoid bias due to a surgeon's learning curve, procedures should be performed by experienced surgeons only. quality of life and vision should also be evaluated. the risk of endothelial rejection will be difficult to address in the context of a rct because of power considerations but large non-randomised comparative case series and corneal graft registry outcome data will be useful in this regard.
data are limited but appear to suggest that atovaquone-proguanil is more effective than chloroquine, amodiaquine, and mefloquine. there are insufficient data for comparisons against sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, halofantrine, artesunate plus mefloquine, quinine plus tetracycline, and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine-trimethoprim-primaquine in treating malaria. there are not enough data to assess safety, but a number of adverse events were identified with all drugs. large trials comparing atovaquone-proguanil with other new combination therapies are needed.
nsaids did not cause any increase in bleeding that required a return to theatre. there was significantly less nausea and vomiting when nsaids were used compared to alternative analgesics.
the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (lng ius) is more effective than cyclical norethisterone (for 21 days) as a treatment for heavy menstrual bleeding. women with an lng ius are more satisfied and willing to continue with treatment but experience more side effects, such as intermenstrual bleeding and breast tenderness. the lng ius results in a smaller mean reduction in menstrual blood loss (as assessed by the pbac chart) than endometrial ablation but there is no evidence of a difference in the rate of satisfaction with treatment. women with an lng ius experience more progestogenic side effects compared to women having tcre for treatment of their heavy menstrual bleeding but there is no evidence of a difference in their perceived quality of life. the lng ius treatment costs less than hysterectomy but there is no evidence of a difference in quality of life measures between these groups. there are no data available from randomised controlled trials comparing progesterone-releasing intrauterine systems to either placebo or other commonly used medical therapies for heavy menstrual bleeding.
this review found no difference between levothyroxine therapy and a control for treating pregnant euthyroid women with thyroid peroxidase antibodies for the outcome of pre-eclampsia, however a reduction in preterm birth and a trend towards reduced miscarriage with levothyroxine was shown. this review also showed no difference for pre-eclampsia or preterm birth when selenium was compared with placebo, however a promising reduction in postpartum thyroiditis was shown. childhood neurodevelopmental delay was not assessed by any trial included in the review. given that this review is based on four trials of moderate risk of bias, with only two trials contributing data (n = 284), there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of one intervention for clinical or subclinical hypothyroidism pre-pregnancy or during pregnancy over another, for improving maternal, fetal, neonatal and childhood outcomes.
evidence from rcts of moderate quality suggest that psychotherapy is useful for treating depressive states in advanced cancer patients. however, no evidence supports the effectiveness of psychotherapy for patients with clinically diagnosed depression.
there is some evidence that chitosan is more effective than placebo in the short-term treatment of overweight and obesity. however, many trials to date have been of poor quality and results have been variable. results obtained from high quality trials indicate that the effect of chitosan on body weight is minimal and unlikely to be of clinical significance.
the findings of this review support use of iui rather than ci in stimulated cycles using cryopreserved sperm for donor insemination.
the use of fiber shows a consistent beneficial effect for relieving overall symptoms and bleeding in the treatment of symptomatic hemorrhoids.
there is 'low level' evidence for non pharmacological interventions such as physical activities given in conjunction with other interventions, and for magnetic stimulation and electromagnetic therapies for beneficial effects on spasticity outcomes in people with ms. a wide range of non pharmacological interventions are used for the treatment of spasticity in ms, but more robust trials are needed to build evidence about these interventions.
there is currently insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to evaluate the role of myomectomy to improve fertility. regarding the surgical approach to myomectomy, current evidence from two randomised controlled trials suggests there is no significant difference between the laparoscopic and open approach regarding fertility performance. this evidence needs to be viewed with caution due to the small number of studies. finally, there is currently no evidence from randomised controlled trials regarding the effect of hysteroscopic myomectomy on fertility outcomes.
there are insufficient data for any reliable recommendation about which policy of care should be used for women with severe early onset pre-eclampsia. further large trials are needed. [note: the citation in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there was evidence that suprapubic catheters have advantages over indwelling catheters in respect of bacteriuria, recatheterisation and discomfort. the clinical significance of bacteriuria was uncertain, however, and there was no information about possible complications or adverse effects during catheter insertion. there was more limited evidence that the use of intermittent catheterisation was also associated with a lower risk of bacteriuria than indwelling urethral catheterisation, but might be more costly. using intermittent catheterisation postoperatively limits catheterisation to those people who definitely need it.
there was no evidence that the degree of bronchodilation achieved with ipratropium bromide was greater than that using a short-acting beta2-agonist. the combination of a beta2-agonist and ipratropium did not appear to increase the effect on fev1 more than either used alone.
the validity of the observed effects is undermined by small participant numbers and inadequate exploration of the different disease etiologies. the effects on long term outcome such as nyha functional class, symptoms, mortality and exercise capacity require further validation. more studies of adequate size are required before the long term effects of sildenafil on clinically important outcomes can be established.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials to determine which method of treatment is the most appropriate for isolated fractures of the ulnar shaft in adults. well designed and reported randomised trials of current forms of conservative treatment are recommended.
despite some positive results regarding rest-pain relief, ulcer healing and amputations, there is no conclusive evidence based on this meta-analysis of the long-term effectiveness and safety of different prostanoids in patients with cli. further well-conducted, high quality randomised double-blinded trials should be performed.
ics therapy reduces hospital admissions in patients with acute asthma who are not treated with oral or intravenous corticosteroids. they may also reduce admissions when they are used in addition to systemic corticosteroids; however, the most recent evidence is conflicting. there is insufficient evidence that ics therapy results in clinically important changes in pulmonary function or clinical scores when used in acute asthma in addition to systemic corticosteroids. also, there is insufficient evidence that ics therapy can be used in place of systemic corticosteroid therapy when treating acute asthma. further research is needed to clarify the most appropriate drug dosage and delivery device, and to define which patients are most likely to benefit from ics therapy. use of similar measures and reporting methods of lung function, and a common, validated, clinical score would be helpful in future versions of this meta-analysis.
initiating treatment of hypertension with beta-blockers leads to modest reductions in cardiovascular disease and no significant effects on mortality. these effects of beta-blockers are inferior to those of other antihypertensive drugs. the grade quality of this evidence is low, implying that the true effect of beta-blockers may be substantially different from the estimate of effects found in this review. further research should be of high quality and should explore whether there are differences between different sub-types of beta-blockers or whether beta-blockers have differential effects on younger and elderly patients.
an open-entry technique is associated with a significant reduction in failed entry when compared to a closed-entry technique, with no difference in the incidence of visceral or vascular injury. significant benefits were noted with the use of a direct-entry technique when compared to the veress needle. the use of the veress needle was associated with an increased incidence of failed entry, extraperitoneal insufflation and omental injury; direct-trocar entry is therefore a safer closed-entry technique. the low rate of reported complications associated with laparoscopic entry and the small number of participants within the included studies may account for the lack of significant difference in terms of major vascular and visceral injury between entry techniques. results should be interpreted with caution for outcomes where only single studies were included.
md rehabilitation programmes do not change the level of impairment, but can improve the experience of people with ms in terms of activity and participation. regular evaluation and assessment of these persons for rehabilitation is recommended. further research into appropriate outcome measures, optimal intensity, frequency, cost and effectiveness of rehabilitation therapy over a longer time period is needed. future research in rehabilitation should focus on improving methodological and scientific rigour of clinical trials.
methadone is an effective maintenance therapy intervention for the treatment of heroin dependence as it retains patients in treatment and decreases heroin use better than treatments that do not utilise opioid replacement therapy. it does not show a statistically significant superior effect on criminal activity or mortality.
the different short-term morbidities associated with each type of haemopoietic stem cell donation were clear, with bone marrow donors experiencing more pain and more restriction post-donation than peripheral blood donors. however, the studies were limited by their methodological quality, failure to provide long-term follow up (for which larger numbers of donors would be required) and a failure to apply consistent measures of quality of life in a way which allows more meaningful evaluation across studies.
there is no evidence that haloperidol in low dosage has different efficacy in comparison with the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and risperidone in the management of delirium or has a greater frequency of adverse drug effects than these drugs. high dose haloperidol was associated with a greater incidence of side effects, mainly parkinsonism, than the atypical antipsychotics. low dose haloperidol may be effective in decreasing the degree and duration of delirium in post-operative patients, compared with placebo. these conclusions must be tempered by the observation that they are based on small studies of limited scope, and therefore will require further corroborating evidence before they can be translated into specific recommendation for the treatment of delirium.
no evidence currently exists to either support or refute the role of surgery in the management of tympanic membrane retractions. higher quality studies are much needed to ascertain this.
despite the consistency of effects seen in trials of wholegrain oats, the positive findings should be interpreted cautiously. many of the trials identified were short term, of poor quality and had insufficient power. most of the trials were funded by companies with commercial interests in wholegrains. there is a need for well-designed, adequately powered, longer term randomised controlled studies in this area. in particular there is a need for randomised controlled trials on wholegrain foods and diets other than oats.
the use of low level laser therapy for treating tuberculosis is still not supported by reliable evidence. researchers need to focus on conducting well-designed randomized controlled trials to justify the continued participation of volunteers for studies of this experimental intervention.
based on only two studies comparing vaginal oestrogens to placebo, vaginal oestrogens reduced the number of utis in postmenopausal women with ruti, however this varied according to the type of oestrogen used and the treatment duration.
use of procalcitonin to guide initiation and duration of antibiotic treatment in patients with ari was not associated with higher mortality rates or treatment failure. antibiotic consumption was significantly reduced across different clinical settings and ari diagnoses. further high-quality research is needed to confirm the safety of this approach for non-european countries and patients in intensive care. moreover, future studies should also establish cost-effectiveness by considering country-specific costs of procalcitonin measurement and potential savings in consumption of antibiotics and other healthcare resources, as well as secondary cost savings due to lower risk of side effects and reduced antimicrobial resistance.
owing to the likelihood of publication bias and marked heterogeneity of treatment effects, it is essential that the findings are interpreted cautiously. from the evidence reviewed here, we consider that: (1) it is unlikely that magnesium is beneficial in reducing mortality both in patients treated early and in patients treated late, and in patients already receiving thrombolytic therapy; (2) it is unlikely that magnesium will reduce mortality when used at high dose (>=75 mmol); (3) magnesium treatment may reduce the incidence of ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, severe arrhythmia needing treatment or lown 2-5, but it may increase the incidence of profound hypotension, bradycardia and flushing; and (4) the areas of uncertainty regarding the effect of magnesium on mortality remain the effect of low dose treatment (< 75 mmol) and in patients not treated with thrombolysis.
although the methodological quality of the majority of trials was, in general, not strong, the meta-analysis results suggest that psychosocial and psychological interventions are an effective treatment option for women suffering from postpartum depression. the long-term effectiveness remains unclear.
interventions before consultations designed to help patients address their information needs within consultations produce limited benefits to patients. further research could explore whether the quality of questions is increased, whether anxiety before consultations is reduced, the effects on other outcomes and the impact of training and the timing of interventions. more studies need to consider the timing of interventions and possibly the type of training provided to clinicians.
point of care computer reminders generally achieve small to modest improvements in provider behaviour. a minority of interventions showed larger effects, but no specific reminder or contextual features were significantly associated with effect magnitude. further research must identify design features and contextual factors consistently associated with larger improvements in provider behaviour if computer reminders are to succeed on more than a trial and error basis.
while caesarean section is a common procedure performed on women worldwide, there is little information available to inform the most appropriate surgical technique to adopt. [note: the 34 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
feeding with a soy formula cannot be recommended for prevention of allergy or food intolerance in infants at high risk of allergy or food intolerance. further research may be warranted to determine the role of soy formulas for prevention of allergy or food intolerance in infants unable to be breast fed with a strong family history of allergy or cow's milk protein intolerance.
we found no evidence in this review to suggest that 5-asa preparations are superior to placebo for the maintenance of medically-induced remission in patients with crohn's disease. therefore it appears that additional randomised trials of this regime are not justified.
we could not demonstrate any significant beneficial effect of propylthiouracil on all-cause mortality, liver-related mortality, liver complications, or liver histology of patients with alcoholic liver disease. propylthiouracil was associated with adverse events. confidence intervals were wide. thus, the risk of random errors and systematic errors was high. accordingly, there is no evidence for using propylthiouracil for alcoholic liver disease outside randomised clinical trials.
optimal self-management allowing for optimisation of asthma control by adjustment of medications may be conducted by either self-adjustment with the aid of a written action plan or by regular medical review. individualised written action plans based on pef are equivalent to action plans based on symptoms. reducing the intensity of self-management education or level of clinical review may reduce its effectiveness.
single-dose oral celecoxib is an effective analgesic for postoperative pain relief. indirect comparison suggests that the 400 mg dose has similar efficacy to ibuprofen 400 mg.
the number of outcome events is too small to allow reliable conclusions to be drawn and more trial data are required to establish whether any differences do exist. nevertheless, there is some evidence that other synthetic (e.g. ptfe) patches may be superior to collagen impregnated dacron grafts in terms of perioperative stroke rates and restenosis. pseudoaneurysm formation may be more common after use of a vein patch compared with a synthetic patch.
the results of this systematic review confirm that (the now historical) policy of unrestricted, unmonitored oxygen therapy has potential harms without clear benefits. however, the question of what is the optimal target range for maintaining blood oxygen levels in preterm/lbw infants was not answered by the data available for inclusion in this review.
regular aerobic exercise during pregnancy appears to improve (or maintain) physical fitness. available data are insufficient to infer important risks or benefits for the mother or infant. larger and better trials are needed before confident recommendations can be made about the benefits and risk of aerobic exercise in pregnancy.
implications for practice. prophylactic use of kinesthetic stimulation cannot be recommended to reduce apnea/bradycardia in preterm infants. implications for research. there are currently no clear research questions regarding prophylactic use of kinesthetic stimulation to prevent apnea in preterm infants.
there are very few randomized controlled trials comparing the various modalities of surgery for fistula in ano. while post operative pain, time to healing and discharge from hospital affect quality of life, recurrence and incontinence are the most important. as it turns out, there seems to be no major difference between the various techniques used as far as recurrence rates are concerned. the use of fibrin glue and advancement flaps are associated with low incontinence rates. there is a crying need for well powered, well conducted randomised controlled trials comparing various modes of treatment of fistula in ano. newer operations like the anal fistula plug and the lift procedure need to be evaluated by randomised clinical trials.
we recommend surgery for early-stage ac of the uterine cervix in carefully staged patients. primary chemoradiation remains a second best alternative for patients unfit for surgery; chemoradiation is probably first choice in patients with (mri or pet-ct-suspected) positive lymph nodes. since the last version of this review no new studies were found.
there is insufficient evidence to make recommendations for practice. further research should evaluate the practice of supplementation of human milk with fat. this may best be done in the context of the development of multicomponent fortifiers. both short term growth outcomes and long term growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes should be evaluated. adverse effects should be evaluated.
current evidence is insufficient to compare contraceptive efficacy and continuation rates for hormonal and intrauterine methods in women aged 25 years and younger. limited data suggests that the levonorgestrel intrauterine system may be an acceptable alternative to the combined oral contraceptive in this population.
robust conclusions could not be drawn from the evidence due to variability in design, interventions, outcomes and results. the interventions implemented in the studies in this review led to the identification and resolution of medication-related problems, however evidence of an effect on resident-related outcomes was not found. there is a need for high-quality cluster-randomised controlled trials testing clinical decision support systems and multidisciplinary interventions that measure well-defined, important resident-related outcomes.
joint lavage does not result in a relevant benefit for patients with knee osteoarthritis in terms of pain relief or improvement of function.
there is limited evidence for the effectiveness of real-time continuous glucose monitoring (cgm) use in children, adults and patients with poorly controlled diabetes. the largest improvements in glycaemic control were seen for sensor-augmented insulin pump therapy in patients with poorly controlled diabetes who had not used an insulin pump before. the risk of severe hypoglycaemia or ketoacidosis was not significantly increased for cgm users, but as these events occurred infrequent these results have to be interpreted cautiously.there are indications that higher compliance of wearing the cgm device improves glycosylated haemoglobin a1c level (hba1c) to a larger extent.
there is currently insufficient evidence to inform whether antibiotics should be used to treat or prevent persistent respiratory symptoms in the post-acute bronchiolitis phase. future rcts that evaluate the efficacy of antibiotics to reduce persistent respiratory symptoms are required, especially in areas where both acute and post-bronchiolitis morbidity is high such as in indigenous communities in the us, new zealand and australia.
in children with ome the effect of grommets on hearing, as measured by standard tests, appears small and diminishes after six to nine months by which time natural resolution also leads to improved hearing in the non-surgically treated children. no effect was found on other child outcomes but data on these were sparse. no study has been performed in children with established speech, language, learning or developmental problems so no conclusions can be made regarding treatment of such children.
using rifampin during an outbreak may lead to the circulation of resistant isolates. use of ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone or penicillin should be considered. all four agents were effective for up to two weeks follow up, though more trials comparing the effectiveness of these agents for eradicating n. meningitidis would provide important insights.
this review showed no significant differences between hdr- and ldr-icbt when considering os, dss, rfs, local control rate, recurrence, metastasis and treatment related complications for women with cervical carcinoma. due to some potential advantages of hdr-icbt (rigid immobilization, outpatient treatment, patient convenience, accuracy of source and applicator positioning, individualized treatment) we recommend the use of hdr-icbt for all clinical stages of cervix cancer.
despite its use over several years the effectiveness of laser photocoagulation for myopic cnv has not been established. although there was a suggestion of short-term effectiveness in one small study on non-subfoveal cnv the results were potentially biased. observational studies suggest that the enlargement of the atrophic laser scar after laser treatment of non-subfoveal cnv could be a potentially vision-threatening long-term complication, even in eyes free of cnv recurrence.
at the moment no evidence from rcts is available which underscores the use of anthracyclines in all. however, "no evidence of effect", as identified in this review, is not the same as "evidence of no effect". for wilms' tumour, rhabdomyosarcoma/undifferentiated sarcoma, ewing's sarcoma, non-hodgkin lymphoma and hepatoblastoma only one rct was available and, therefore, no definitive conclusions can be made about the antitumour efficacy of treatment with or without anthracyclines in these tumours. for other childhood cancers no rcts were identified and therefore, no conclusions can be made about the antitumour efficacy of treatment with or without anthracyclines in these tumours.
acupuncture performed on the day of et shows a beneficial effect on the live birth rate; however, with the present evidence this could be attributed to placebo effect and the small number of women included in the trials. acupuncture should not be offered during the luteal phase in routine clinical practice until further evidence is available from sufficiently powered rcts.
we found no evidence supporting or refuting that cyclosporin a may delay death, death or liver transplantation, or progression of primary biliary cirrhosis. cyclosporin a caused more adverse events than placebo, like renal dysfunction and hypertension. we do not recommend the use of cyclosporin a outside randomised clinical trials.
although data were available from only two eligible trials the data were sufficiently robust to make some recommendations for practice. there is evidence that different designs are better for men and women. diapers are the most cost-effective disposable design for men. disposable pull-ups are most preferred for women but are expensive: disposable inserts are a cheaper alternative (except in nursing homes where diapers are preferred to inserts at night). washable diapers are the cheapest design but have limited acceptability, confined mainly to some men at night. there were not enough people in the trials to draw any conclusions about which designs are best for faecal incontinence and no particular design seemed to be better or worse for skin health. people have different preferences for absorbent product designs and using a combination (different designs for day/night, going out/staying in) may be more effective and less expensive than using one design all the time.
there is insufficient evidence to assess whether pregnant women who have vaginal colonisation with ureaplasma should be treated with antibiotics to prevent preterm birth. preterm birth is a significant perinatal problem. upper genital tract infections, including ureaplasmas, are suspected of playing a role in preterm birth and preterm rupture of the membranes. antibiotics are used to treat women with preterm prelabour rupture of the membranes; this may result in prolongation of pregnancy and lowers the risks of maternal and neonatal infection. however, antibiotics may be beneficial earlier in pregnancy to eradicate potentially causative agents.
doxycycline (six weeks) plus streptomycin (two or three weeks) regimen is more effective regimen than doxycycline plus rifampicin (six weeks) regimen. since it needs daily intramuscular (im) injection, access to care and cost are important factors in deciding between two choices. quinolone plus rifampicin (six weeks) regimen is slightly better tolerated than doxycycline plus rifampicin, and low quality evidence did not show any difference in overall effectiveness.
to date, incentive programmes have not been shown to prevent smoking initiation among youth, although there are relatively few published studies and these are of variable quality. trials included in this meta-analysis were all studies of the sfc competition, which distributed small to moderately sized prizes to whole classes, usually through a lottery system. future studies might investigate the efficacy of incentives given to individual participants to prevent smoking uptake. future research should consider the efficacy of incentives on smoking initiation, as well as progression of smoking, evaluate these in varying populations from different socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds, and describe the intervention components in detail.
at present there is little evidence from randomised controlled trials to support the use of any of the anticonvulsants currently used in the neonatal period. in the literature, there remains a body of opinion that seizures should be treated because of the concern that seizures in themselves may be harmful, although this is only supported by relatively low grade evidence (levene 2002; massingale 1993). development of safe and effective treatment strategies relies on future studies of high quality (randomised controlled trials with methodology that assures validity) and of sufficient size to have the power to detect clinically important reductions in mortality and severe neurodevelopmental disability in addition to any short term reduction in seizure burden.
we found no statistically significant differences in fatal or non-fatal serious adverse events in trials in which regular salmeterol was randomly allocated with ics, in comparison to ics alone at the same dose. although 13,447 adults and 1862 children have now been included in trials, the frequency of adverse events is too low and the results are too imprecise to confidently rule out a relative increase in all cause mortality or non-fatal adverse events with salmeterol used in conjunction with ics. however, the absolute difference between groups in the risk of serious adverse events was very small. we could not determine whether the increase in all cause non-fatal serious adverse events reported in the previous meta-analysis on regular salmeterol alone is abolished by the additional use of regular ics. we await the results of large ongoing surveillance studies mandated by the fda to provide more information. there were no asthma-related deaths and few asthma-related serious adverse events. clinical decisions and information for patients regarding regular use of salmeterol have to take into account the balance between known symptomatic benefits of salmeterol and the degree of uncertainty and concern associated with its potential harmful effects.
results from one of the included studies support the use of preoperative intravitreal bevacizumab to reduce the incidence of early povch. there are currently no other high quality rcts that support the use of anti-vegf agents perioperatively to reduce the incidence of early or late povch. the remaining studies identified by the search suggest that the preoperative use of bevacizumab may reduce the incidence of early povch, but it should be recognised that there are a number of significant methodological issues in these studies that lead us to be cautious when interpreting their findings and make any definitive conclusions unwarranted.
second-line chemotherapy is effective in prolonging time to progression and survival in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. further rcts are needed to assess the optimal chemotherapy regimen.
there is evidence of effectiveness of tubal flushing with oil-soluble contrast media in increasing the odds of pregnancy and live birth versus no intervention. the limited evidence of an increase in the odds of live birth from tubal flushing with oil-soluble contrast media versus water-soluble contrast media must be interpreted cautiously. further robust randomised trials, comparing oil-soluble versus water-soluble media and comparing water-soluble media versus no intervention, would be a useful further guide to clinical practice. trials are also required to ascertain the place of flushing with oil-soluble contrast media compared to established treatments for unexplained infertility, such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilisation and compared to laparoscopic removal of endometriosis. further research is merited to ascertain the mechanism of the fertility enhancing effect of oil-soluble media, as to whether this is a 'tubal flushing' phenomenon, an effect on the intraperitoneal environment, or an implantation enhancing effect on the endometrium.
there are no published data to guide the prescription of chronic oxygen supplementation to people with advanced lung disease due to cf. short-term oxygen therapy during sleep and exercise improves oxygenation but is associated with modest and probably clinically inconsequential hypercapnia. there are improvements in exercise duration, time to fall asleep and regular attendance at school or work. there is a need for larger, well-designed clinical trials to assess the benefits of long-term oxygen therapy in people with cf administered continuously or during exercise or sleep or both.
tacrolimus may be superior to cyclosporin regarding bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, lymphocytic bronchitis, treatment withdrawal, and arterial hypertension, but may be inferior regarding development of diabetes. no difference in mortality and acute rejection was observed between patients treated with tacrolimus and cyclosporin. there were few studies comparing tacrolimus and cyclosporin after lung transplantation, and the numbers of patients and events in the included studies were limited. furthermore, the included studies were deemed to be at high risk of bias. hence, more rcts are needed to assess the results of the present review. such studies ought to be conducted with low risks of systematic errors (bias) and of random errors (play of chance).
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to determine which method of treatment is the most appropriate for simple dislocations of the elbow in adults. although weak and inconclusive, the available evidence from a trial comparing surgery versus conservative treatment does not suggest that the surgical repair of elbow ligaments for simple elbow dislocation improves long-term function. future research should focus on questions relating to non-surgical treatment, such as the duration of immobilisation.
corticosteroids significantly reduced hearing loss and neurological sequelae, but did not reduce overall mortality. data support the use of corticosteroids in patients with bacterial meningitis in high-income countries. we found no beneficial effect in low-income countries.
there are still only a small number of studies assessing the use of hypnosis for labour and childbirth. although the intervention shows some promise, further research is needed before recommendations can be made regarding its clinical usefulness for pain management in maternity care.
there is limited evidence that the addition of chm to clomiphene is associated with improved clinical pregnancy outcomes and no other evidence of any other effect. the methodology of rcts was not adequately reported by primary studies.
as only three relevant rcts were identified, we have limited capacity to compare the benefits and harms of medical interventions currently used for treating ee. further rcts on therapies for ee are required.
nicotine replacement therapy is the only pharmacotherapy for smoking cessation that has been tested in rcts conducted in pregnancy. there is insufficient evidence to determine whether or not nrt is effective or safe when used to promote smoking cessation in pregnancy or to determine whether or not using nrt has positive or negative impacts on birth outcomes. further research evidence of efficacy and safety is needed, ideally from placebo-controlled rcts that investigate higher doses of nrt than were tested in the included studies.
the decision to prescribe antibiotics for women with prom is not clearcut. benefits in some short-term outcomes (prolongation of pregnancy, infection, less abnormal cerebral ultrasound before discharge from hospital) should be balanced against a lack of evidence of benefit for others, including perinatal mortality, and longer term outcomes. if antibiotics are prescribed it is unclear which would be the antibiotic of choice. co-amoxiclav should be avoided in women at risk of preterm delivery due to increased risk of neonatal necrotising enterocolitis.
there is insufficient data to be sure whether routinely giving blood to clinically stable children with severe anaemia in endemic malarious areas reduces death, or results in higher haematocrit measured at one month.
this review does not provide evidence that dopaminergic agonists are of benefit to patients with acute or chronic hepatic encephalopathy, or fulminant hepatic failure. the review is limited by the small number of trials performed within this field, the low number of patients randomised in each trial, and the low methodological quality of included trials. accordingly, there is also insufficient evidence to exclude a potential beneficial effect. dopaminergic agonists should not be used for hepatic encephalopathy, but may be assessed in future randomised clinical trials.
the question as to whether people with amd should take ginkgo biloba extract to prevent progression of the disease has not been answered by research to date. two small trials have suggested possible benefit of gingko biloba on vision and further trials are warranted. ginkgo biloba is widely used in china, germany, and france. future trials should be larger, and last longer, in order to provide a more robust measure of the effect of gingko biloba extract on amd.
there are few controlled trial data concerning the use of inhaled beta2-agonist agents in acute exacerbations of copd and none that have compared these agents directly with placebo. none of the studies used the more modern beta2-agonists used most widely in this setting (salbutamol and terbutaline). beta2-agonists and ipratropium both produce small improvements in fev1, but beta2-agonists may worsen pao2 for a period. we could not draw conclusions concerning possible additive effects.
although more than half of the included studies were assessed as being at high risk of bias, and the rest at unclear, there was evidence to support the effectiveness and safety of topical minoxidil in the treatment of female pattern hair loss. further direct comparison studies of minoxidil 5% applied once a day, which could improve adherence when compared to minoxidil 2% twice daily, are still required. consideration should also be given to conducting additional well-designed, adequately-powered randomised controlled trials investigating several of the other treatment options.
there is limited evidence to support the use of antibiotics in acute bronchitis. antibiotics may have a modest beneficial effect in some patients with acute bronchitis though data on subsets of patients who may benefit more from treatment is lacking. however, the magnitude of this benefit needs to be considered in the broader context of potential side effects, medicalisation for a self limiting condition, increased resistance to respiratory pathogens and cost of antibiotic treatment.
there is no evidence that single or multiple dose intravenous secretin is effective and as such currently it should not be recommended or administered as a treatment for asd. further experimental assessment of secretin's effectiveness for asd can only be justified if there is new high-quality and replicated scientific evidence that either finds that secretin has a role in neurotransmission in a way that could benefit all children with asd or identifies important subgroups of children with asd who could benefit from secretin because of a proven link between the action of secretin and the known cause of their asd, or the type of problems they are experiencing.
the results of non-randomised studies have concluded that a low-phenylalanine diet is effective in reducing blood phenylalanine levels and improving intelligence quotient and neuropsychological outcomes. we were unable to find any randomised controlled studies that have assessed the effect of a low-phenylalanine diet versus no diet from diagnosis. in view of evidence from non-randomised studies, such a study would be unethical and it is recommended that low-phenylalanine diet should be commenced at the time of diagnosis. there is uncertainty about the precise level of phenylalanine restriction and when, if ever, the diet should be relaxed. this should be addressed by randomised controlled studies.
the conclusions of this review are limited by the lack of data. more research of higher methodological quality is needed.
at present, there is no evidence to recommend the clinical use of oral budesonide for the induction of remission in active ulcerative colitis. mesalamine is superior to budesonide for the treatment of active ulcerative colitis.
although there is evidence that high dose chemotherapy and autograft significantly improves event-free survival compared to conventional chemotherapy in women with metastatic breast cancer there is no significant evidence of benefit in overall survival. high dose chemotherapy with bone marrow or stem cell transplantation should not be given to women with metastatic breast cancer outside of clinical trials.
there is no good evidence to support the routine administration of acid prophylaxis drugs in normal labour to prevent gastric aspiration and its consequences. giving such drugs to women once a decision to give general anaesthesia is made, is assessed in another cochrane review. [note: the four citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is no strong evidence that the large-scale use of prophylactic antibiotics in clean and clean-contaminated ear surgery is helpful in reducing postoperative complications such as wound infection, discharge from the outer ear canal, labyrinthitis and graft failure.
there is insufficient evidence to support inspiratory muscle training as an effective treatment to improve function after stroke, and no evidence relating to the safety of inspiratory muscle training. further well-designed rcts are required.
antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of first trimester surgical abortion is effective in preventing post-abortal upper genital tract infection. evidence of between trial heterogeneity suggests that the effect might not apply to all settings, population groups or interventions. this review did not determine the most effective antibiotic prophylaxis regimen. antibiotic choice should take into account the local epidemiology of genital tract infections, including sexually transmitted infections. further rcts comparing different antibiotics or combinations of antibiotics with each other would be useful. such trials could be done in low and middle income countries and where the prevalence of genital tract infections in women presenting for abortion is high.
while a potential benefit of platelet-rich therapies to augment long bone healing in adults cannot be ruled out, the currently available evidence from a single trial is insufficient to support the routine use of this intervention in clinical practice. future trials should focus on reporting patient-reported functional outcomes from all trial participants for a minimum follow-up of one year.
although 14 rcts were included in this review, few dealt with the same comparisons, all were small to moderate size and their methodological quality was generally poor. any conclusions, therefore, remain tentative as they are based on a limited amount of data and will require further rcts to substantiate them. in none of the comparisons was there a significant improvement in pregnancy rate but this may be due to the lack of power (i.e. insufficient patients randomised to demonstrate a significant difference between treatments). there was a trend towards better pregnancy rates with the addition of a gnrh-a to gonadotrophin stimulation and these interventions warrant further study. despite theoretical advantages, urinary-derived fsh preparations did not improve pregnancy rates when compared to traditional and cheaper hmg preparations; their only demonstrable benefit was a reduced risk of ohss in cycles when administered without the concomitant use of a gnrh-a. no conclusions can be drawn on miscarriage and multiple pregnancy rates due to insufficient reporting of these outcomes in the trials.
there are now a small number of trials assessing different surgical techniques with inactive and active control treatments. the studies assembled in the review have failed to demonstrate consistent effects in favour of surgery and do not provide convincing evidence to support its use in sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome. short-term outcomes are unlikely to consistently identify suitable candidates for surgery. long-term follow-up of patients who undergo surgical correction of upper airway obstruction is required. this would help to determine whether surgery is a curative intervention, or whether there is a tendency for the signs and symptoms of sleep apnoea to re-assert themselves, prompting patients to seek further treatment for sleep apnoea.
the present meta-analysis confirmed that adjuvant chemotherapy of crc should not last for more than 6 months. prolonged duration would result in lower benefit to risk ratio. however, the results do not make it possible to favour either 3 or 6 month durations. they should help design a future rct comparing different durations of continuous treatment.
day care has beneficial effect on children's development, school success and adult life patterns. to date, all randomised trials have been conducted among disadvantaged populations in the usa. the extent to which the results are generaliseable to other cultures and socioeconomic groups has yet to be evaluated.
the use of financial incentives to reward pcps for improving the quality of primary healthcare services is growing. however, there is insufficient evidence to support or not support the use of financial incentives to improve the quality of primary health care. implementation should proceed with caution and incentive schemes should be more carefully designed before implementation. in addition to basing incentive design more on theory, there is a large literature discussing experiences with these schemes that can be used to draw out a number of lessons that can be learned and that could be used to influence or modify the design of incentive schemes. more rigorous study designs need to be used to account for the selection of physicians into incentive schemes. the use of instrumental variable techniques should be considered to assist with the identification of treatment effects in the presence of selection bias and other sources of unobserved heterogeneity. in randomised trials, care must be taken in using the correct unit of analysis and more attention should be paid to blinding. studies should also examine the potential unintended consequences of incentive schemes by having a stronger theoretical basis, including a broader range of outcomes, and conducting more extensive subgroup analysis. studies should more consistently describe i) the type of payment scheme at baseline or in the control group, ii) how payments to medical groups were used and distributed within the groups, and iii) the size of the new payments as a percentage of total revenue. further research comparing the relative costs and effects of financial incentives with other behaviour change interventions is also required.
the prone position was significantly superior to the supine position in terms of oxygenation. however, as most participants were ventilated preterm infants, the benefits of prone positioning may be most relevant to these infants. in addition, although placing infants and children in the prone position may improve respiratory function, the association of sids with prone positioning means that infants should only be placed in this position while under continuous cardiorespiratory monitoring.
there is moderate evidence that lumbar supports are not more effective than no intervention or training in preventing low-back pain, and conflicting evidence whether they are effective supplements to other preventive interventions. it remains unclear whether lumbar supports are more effective than no or other interventions for treating low-back pain. there is still a need for high quality randomised trials on the effectiveness of lumbar supports. one of the most essential issues to tackle in these future trials seems to be the realization of an adequate compliance. special attention should be paid to different outcome measures, types of patients and types of lumbar support.
we did not find evidence to support or refute bile acids for liver-transplanted patients. further randomised trials are necessary before bile acids can be recommended to liver-transplanted patients.
risperidone, as monotherapy and adjunctive treatment, is effective in reducing manic symptoms. the main adverse effects are weight gain, extrapyramidal effects and sedation. risperidone is comparable in efficacy to haloperidol. higher quality trials are required to provide more reliable and precise estimates of its costs and benefits.
meta-analysis shows that behavioral interventions have little effect on increasing condom use among hiv-positive women. however, these findings should be used with caution since results were based on a few small trials that were targeted specifically towards hiv-positive women. to decrease sexual transmission of hiv among this population, we recommend interventions that combine condom promotion, family planning provision and counselling, and efforts to reduce viral loads among hiv-positive women and their partners (e.g., haart treatment provision). new research is needed to address the needs of hiv-positive women, including an assessment of the impact of interventions that combine safer sexual behavior and harm reduction approaches.
there is currently not sufficient evidence to support or refute routine pre-operative biliary drainage for patients with obstructive jaundice. pre-operative biliary drainage may increase the rate of serious adverse events. so, the safety of routine pre-operative biliary drainage has not been established. pre-operative biliary drainage should not be used in patients undergoing surgery for obstructive jaundice outside randomised clinical trials.
the evidence in this review suggests that ect, combined with treatment with antipsychotic drugs, may be considered an option for people with schizophrenia, particularly when rapid global improvement and reduction of symptoms is desired. this is also the case for those with schizophrenia who show limited response to medication alone. even though this initial beneficial effect may not last beyond the short term, there is no clear evidence to refute its use for people with schizophrenia. the research base for the use of ect in people with schizophrenia continues to expand, but even after more than five decades of clinical use, there remain many unanswered questions regarding its role in the management of people with schizophrenia.
while there is a small effect of calcium supplementation in the upper limb, the increase in bmd which results is unlikely to result in a clinically significant decrease in fracture risk. the results do not support the use of calcium supplementation in healthy children as a public health intervention. these results cannot be extrapolated to children with medical conditions affecting bone metabolism.
it remains unclear whether antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate hypertension during pregnancy is worthwhile. [note: the 23 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
evidence from existing randomized control trials comparing chcs given continuously (greater than 28 days of active combined hormones) to traditional monthly cyclic dosing (21 days of active hormone and 7 days of placebo) is of good quality. however, the variations in type of hormones and time length for continuous dosing make a formal meta-analysis impossible. future studies should choose a previously described type of chc and dosing regimen. more attention needs to be directed towards participant satisfaction and menstruation-associated symptoms.
there is no evidence from randomized controlled trials that supports the routine use of secondary decompressive craniectomy to reduce unfavorable outcomes in adults with severe tbi and refractory high icp. in the study with a pediatric population, decompressive craniectomy reduced the risk of death and unfavorable outcomes. despite the wide ci for death and the small sample size of this one identified study, the treatment may be justified in patients below the age of 18 years when maximal medical treatment has failed to control icp. there are two ongoing randomized controlled trials of decompressive craniectomy (rescueicp and decra) that will allow further conclusions on the efficacy of this procedure in adults.
this review recommends the use of both verbal and written health information when communicating about care issues with patients and/or significant others on discharge from hospital to home. the combination of verbal and written health information enables the provision of standardised care information to patients and/or significant others, which appears to improve knowledge and satisfaction. many of our objectives could not be addressed in this review due to lack of trials which met the review's inclusion criteria. there is therefore scope for future research to investigate the effects of providing verbal and written health information on readmission rates, recovery time, complication rates, costs of health care, consumers' confidence level, stress and anxiety and adherence to recommended treatment and staff training in the delivery of verbal and written information. in addition there are other factors which impact on the effectiveness of information provided that were not considered in this review but are worthy of a separate systematic review, such as the impact of patient and/or significant others being involved in the development of the written information and cultural issues around development and provision of information. due to concerns about literacy levels for some population groups, other systematic reviews should also focus on other modes of delivery of information besides the written format.
although the treatment with oral hydroxyethylrutosides looks promising for symptom relief in first and second degree haemorrhoids, its use cannot be recommended until new evidence reassures women and their clinicians about their safety. the most commonly used approaches, such as dietary modifications and local treatments, were not properly evaluated during pregnancy and the puerperium.
based on current knowledge, household educational or dust control interventions are ineffective in reducing blood lead levels in children as a population health measure. there is currently insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of soil abatement or combination interventions. further trials are required to establish the most effective intervention for prevention of lead exposure. key elements of these trials should include strategies to reduce multiple sources of lead exposure simultaneously using empirical dust clearance levels. it is also necessary for trials to be carried out in developing countries and in differing socioeconomic groups in developed countries.
this review found very limited evidence to support the routine use of pneumococcal vaccine in people with asthma. a randomised trial of vaccine efficacy in children and adults with asthma is needed.
there is no evidence that children who are denied oral fluids for more than six hours preoperatively benefit in terms of intraoperative gastric volume and ph compared with children permitted unlimited fluids up to two hours preoperatively. children permitted fluids have a more comfortable preoperative experience in terms of thirst and hunger. this evidence applies only to children who are considered to be at normal risk of aspiration/regurgitation during anaesthesia.
this review found no evidence for short-term benefit from vitamin b6 in improving mood (depression, fatigue and tension symptoms) or cognitive functions. for the older people included in one of the two trials included in the review, oral vitamin b6 supplements improved biochemical indices of vitamin b6 status, but potential effects on blood homocysteine levels were not assessed in either study. this review found evidence that there is scope for increasing some biochemical indices of vitamin b6 status among older people. more randomized controlled trials are needed to explore possible benefits from vitamin b6 supplementation for healthy older people and for those with cognitive impairment or dementia.
compared to conventional ventilation, benefit is demonstrated for both hfppv and triggered ventilation with regard to a reduction in air leak and a shorter duration of ventilation, respectively. in none of the trials was complex respiratory monitoring undertaken and thus it is not possible to conclude that the mechanism of producing those benefits is by provocation of synchronized ventilation. further trials are needed to determine whether synchronized ventilation is associated with other benefits, but optimisation of trigger and ventilator design with respect to respiratory diagnosis is encouraged before embarking on further trials. it is essential newer forms of triggered ventilation are tested in adequately powered randomised trials with long-term outcomes before they are incorporated into routine clinical practice.
there is insufficient evidence for reliable conclusions about the effects of exercise on prevention of pre-eclampsia and its complications. [note: the four citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is insufficient evidence to judge whether antifibrinolytics should be used to treat haemoptysis from any cause, though limited evidence suggests they may reduce the duration of bleeding.
this meta-analysis showed that patients receiving chemotherapy plus rituximab benefit in terms of os as well as pfs compared to those with chemotherapy alone. therefore, it supports the recommendation of rituximab in combination with fluc as an option for the first-line treatment as well as for the people with relapsed or refractory cll. the available evidence regarding the other assessed comparisons was not sufficient to deduct final conclusions.
good trials in low-income settings are warranted. in high-income settings, there is limited research which has not shown an advantage of antibiotics or antiseptics over simply keeping the cord clean. quality of evidence is low.
evidence suggests that, in people with newly diagnosed oag, the risk of uncontrolled iop is higher in people treated with medication used before the 1990s when compared to laser trabeculoplasty at two years follow up. trabeculoplasty is less effective than trabeculectomy in controlling iop at six months and two years follow up. different laser technology and protocol modalities were compared to the traditional laser trabeculoplasty and more evidence is necessary to determine if they are equivalent or not. there is no evidence to determine the effectiveness of laser trabeculoplasty compared to contemporary medication (prostaglandin analogues, topical anhydrase inhibitors and alpha2-agonists) and also with contemporary surgical techniques. also there should be further investigation in to the effectiveness of laser trabeculoplasty in specific racial groups, specific diagnostic groups, such as pseudoexfoliation and pigmentary glaucoma and different stages of oag. more research is also required determining cost-effectiveness of laser trabeculoplasty in the management of glaucoma.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend any specific semen preparation technique. large, high quality randomised controlled trials comparing the effectiveness of a gradient, swim-up and wash and centrifugation technique on clinical outcomes are lacking. further randomised trials are warranted.
although antioxidant therapy does not reduce the risk of cardiovascular and all-cause death or major cardiovascular events in people with ckd, it is possible that some benefit may be present, particularly in those on dialysis. however, the small size and generally suboptimal quality of the included studies highlighted the need for sufficiently powered studies to confirm this possibility. current evidence suggests that antioxidant therapy in predialysis ckd patients may prevent progression to eskd; this finding was however based on a very small number of events. further studies with longer follow-up are needed for confirmation. appropriately powered studies are needed to reliably assess the effects of antioxidant therapy in people with ckd.
there is insufficient direct evidence from specialised trials to prove the efficacy of vaccine for preventing postherpetic neuralgia beyond its effect on reducing herpes zoster, although vaccination may be efficacious and safe for preventing herpes zoster and thus reduce the incidence of postherpetic neuralgia in adults aged 60 years or older.
no clear conclusions can be made on the choice of implant for internal fixation of intracapsular fractures from the available evidence within randomised trials.
in the absence of evidence of efficacy for oral aceclofenac in acute postoperative pain (at least at 150 mg single dose), its use in this indication is not justified. because trials clearly demonstrating analgesic efficacy in the most basic of acute pain studies are lacking, use in other indications should be evaluated carefully. given the large number of effective drugs available in this and similar classes of analgesics, there is no urgent research agenda required to demonstrate the effective dose of aceclofenac in acute postoperative pain.
budesonide in high dose delivered by the particular nebuliser used in the only double-blinded study that could be included in this review was more effective than budesonide 1600 mcg via a large volume spacer. however, it is not clear whether this was an effect of nominal dose delivered or delivery system. cost, compliance and patient preference are important determinants of clinical effectiveness that still require further assessment. future studies are needed to evaluate the relative effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroids delivered by different combinations of nebuliser/compressor compared to holding chamber. moreover, further studies assessing these delivery methods are needed in infants and pre-school children, as these are groups that are likely to be considered for treatment with nebulised corticosteroids.
in patients with primary hypertension, weight loss diets reduced body weight and blood pressure, however the magnitude of the effects are uncertain as a result of the small number of patients and studies that could be included in the analyses. it is not known whether weight loss reduces mortality and morbidity. no useful information on adverse effects was reported in the relevant trials.
there is no evidence of difference between mct and lct on short-term growth, gastrointestinal intolerance, or necrotizing enterocolitis. therefore, neither formula type could be concluded to improve short-term growth or have less adverse effects. further studies are necessary because the results from the included eight studies are imprecise due to small numbers and do not address important long-term outcomes. additional research should aim to clarify effects on formula tolerance and on long-term growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes, and include larger study populations to better evaluate effect on nec incidence.
there is insufficient evidence at present that selenium supplementation alleviates the side effects of tumour specific chemotherapy or radiotherapy treatments or that it improves the after-effects of surgery, or improves quality-of-life in cancer patients or reduces secondary lymphoedema. to date, research findings do not provide a basis for any recommendation in favour or against selenium supplementation in cancer patients. potential hazards of supplementing a trace mineral should be kept in mind. since the last version of this review, the one new additional study has not provided information to change the conclusions of the original review.
we identified four studies comparing regular formoterol to regular salmeterol (without randomised inhaled corticosteroids, but all participants were on regular background inhaled corticosteroids). the events were infrequent and consequently too few patients have been studied to allow any firm conclusions to be drawn about the relative safety of formoterol and salmeterol. asthma-related serious adverse events were rare and there were no reported asthma-related deaths.
a single study showed that the transantral approach for orbital decompression was related to more complications than the endoscopic transnasal technique which is preferred by ear, nose and throat (ent) surgeons, usually as an adjunctive procedure. intravenous steroids were reported in a single trial to be the most efficient intervention for dysthyroid optic neuropathy. the majority of published literature on orbital decompression for thyroid eye disease consists of retrospective, cohort, or case series studies. although these provide useful descriptive information, clarification is required to show the relative effectiveness of each intervention for various indications. the two rcts reviewed are not robust enough to provide credible evidence to our understanding of current decompressive surgery and to support recommendations for clinical practice. there is evidence from currently available uncontrolled studies that removal of the medial and lateral wall (balanced decompression) with or without fat removal may be the most effective surgical method related to only a few complications. there is a clear need for randomised studies evaluating the balanced two-wall, three-wall and orbital fat decompression techniques. comparison with other surgical techniques for orbital decompression or with immunosuppression in cases of compressive optic neuropathy would also be important. these studies should primarily address the reduction of exophthalmos, disease severity, complication rates, quality of life and cost of the intervention.
one large randomised controlled trial has shown that this form of treatment using dextranomer in stabilised hyaluronic acid (nasha dx) improves continence for a little over half of patients in the short term. however, the number of identified trials was limited and most had methodological weaknesses.
photodynamic therapy in people with choroidal neovascularisation due to amd is effective in preventing clinically significant visual loss with a relative risk reduction of approximately 20%. modified treatment regimens have not convincingly shown increased effectiveness. there was no evidence on quality of life and little on cost.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials to support or refute the use of prophylactic antibiotics when starting mechanical ventilation in newborn infants, or to support or refute continuing antibiotics once initial cultures have ruled out infection in mechanically ventilated newborn infants.
housing investment which improves thermal comfort in the home can lead to health improvements, especially where the improvements are targeted at those with inadequate warmth and those with chronic respiratory disease. the health impacts of programmes which deliver improvements across areas and do not target according to levels of individual need were less clear, but reported impacts at an area level may conceal health improvements for those with the greatest potential to benefit. best available evidence indicates that housing which is an appropriate size for the householders and is affordable to heat is linked to improved health and may promote improved social relationships within and beyond the household. in addition, there is some suggestion that provision of adequate, affordable warmth may reduce absences from school or work. while many of the interventions were targeted at low income groups, a near absence of reporting differential impacts prevented analysis of the potential for housing improvement to impact on social and economic inequalities.
there is good evidence supporting the use of human-derived botulinum immune globulin in infant intestinal botulism. a single randomized controlled trial demonstrated significant decreases in the duration of hospitalization, mechanical ventilation and tube or parenteral feeding among treated patients. our search did not reveal any evidence examining the use of other medical treatments including serum trivalent botulism antitoxin.
no differences were observed between the classes of antimicrobials included in this review for the symptomatic cure of acute uncomplicated uti. fluoroquinolones proved more effective than beta-lactams for the short-term bacteriological outcome, probably with little clinical significance. individualised treatment should take into consideration the predictable susceptibility of urinary pathogens in local areas, possible adverse events and resistance development, and patient preference.
prophylactic intratracheal administration of protein free synthetic surfactant to infants at risk of developing respiratory distress syndrome has been demonstrated to improve clinical outcome. infants who receive prophylactic protein free ss have a decreased risk of pneumothorax, a decreased risk of pulmonary interstitial emphysema, and a decreased risk of neonatal mortality. infants who receive prophylactic protein free ss have an increased risk of developing patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hemorrhage.
there is very limited evidence upon which to base conclusions about the relative effectiveness of psychological interventions, antidepressant medication and a combination of these interventions. on the basis of the available evidence, the effectiveness of these interventions for treating depressive disorders in children and adolescents cannot be established. further appropriately powered rcts are required.
both spinal and epidural techniques are shown to provide effective anaesthesia for caesarean section. both techniques are associated with moderate degrees of maternal satisfaction. spinal anaesthesia has a shorter onset time, but treatment for hypotension is more likely if spinal anaesthesia is used. no conclusions can be drawn about intraoperative side-effects and postoperative complications because they were of low incidence and/or not reported.
compared to standard monitoring, patients who self-monitor or self-manage can improve the quality of their oral anticoagulation therapy. the number of thromboembolic events and mortality were decreased without increases in harms. however, self-monitoring or self-management were not feasible for up to half of the patients requiring anticoagulant therapy. reasons included patient refusal, exclusion by their general practitioner, and inability to complete training.
this review found no differences between the two types of monitoring (internal or external tocodynamometry) for any of the maternal or neonatal outcomes. given that this review is based on three studies (n = 1945 women) of moderate quality, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of one form of tocodynamometry over another for women where intravenous oxytocin was administered for induction or augmentation of labour.
the optimal management of children with recurrent idiopathic epistaxis is unknown, however if silver nitrate nasal cautery is undertaken 75% is preferable to 95% as it is more effective in the short term and causes less pain. high-quality randomised controlled trials comparing interventions either with placebo or no treatment, and with a follow-up period of at least a year, are needed to assess the relative merits of the various treatments currently in use.
two new studies have been published since the last version of the review, altering our conclusions. we have evidence from four low to medium quality randomised trials that using unconventional fractionation regimens (greater than 2 gy per fraction) does not affect local recurrence, is associated with decreased acute toxicity and does not seem to affect breast appearance or late toxicity for selected women treated with breast conserving therapy. these are mostly women with node negative tumours smaller than 3 cm and negative pathological margins. long-term follow up (> 5 years) is available for a small proportion of the patients randomised. longer follow up is required for a more complete assessment of the effect of altered fractionation.
evidence from this review indicates that airway clearance techniques are safe for individuals with copd and confer small beneficial effects on some clinical outcomes. consideration may be given to the use of airway clearance techniques for patients with copd in both acute and stable disease, however current studies suggest that the benefits achieved may be small.
overall, there was insufficient evidence available from trials comparing regional versus general anaesthesia to rule out clinically important differences. regional anaesthesia may reduce acute postoperative confusion but no conclusions can be drawn for mortality or other outcomes.
presently, the available evidence does not support routine use of oral ltras in acute asthma. further studies are required to assess whether intravenous treatment can reduce the risk of hospital admission, and what the most appropriate dose regimen is. additional research is also needed into safety and efficacy of additional doses for those on maintenance therapy, and larger paediatric trials are required to allow subgroup analysis. prolonged studies would be required to establish other health economic outcomes in admitted patients.
antiplatelet agents have a beneficial effect in reducing all cause mortality and fatal cardiovascular events in patients with ic. treatment with antiplatelet agents in this patient group however is associated with an increase in adverse effects, including gi symptoms, and healthcare professionals and patients need to be aware of the potential harm as well as the benefit of therapy; more data are required on the effect of antiplatelets on major bleeding. evidence on the effectiveness of aspirin versus either placebo or an alternative antiplatelet agent is lacking. evidence for thienopyridine antiplatelet agents was particularly compelling and there is an urgent need for multicentre trials to compare the effects of aspirin against thienopyridines.
nmes appears an effective means of improving muscle weakness in adults with progressive diseases such as copd, chronic heart failure and cancer. further research is required to clarify its place in clinical practice, by determining the optimal parameters for a nmes programme, the patients most likely to benefit, and its impact on morbidity and service use.
there is insufficient evidence to make firm conclusions about the effectiveness of working wrist splints in decreasing pain or increasing function for people with ra. potential adverse effects, such as decreased range of motion, do not seem to be an issue although some of these splints decrease grip strength and dexterity. similarly, preliminary evidence suggests that resting hand and wrist splints do not seem to affect range of motion (rom) or pain, although participants preferred wearing a resting splint to not wearing one. there is evidence that extra-depth shoes and molded insoles decrease pain during weight-bearing activities such as standing, walking, and stair-climbing. supported insoles may be effective in preventing progression of hallux abductus angle but do not appear to have any impact on pain.
though the available evidence suggests that electromagnetic field stimulation may offer some benefit in the treatment of delayed union and non-union of long bone fractures, it is inconclusive and insufficient to inform current practice. more definitive conclusions on treatment effect await further well-conducted randomised controlled trials.
epidural anaesthesia may reduce the risk of developing chronic pain after thoracotomy in about one patient out of every four patients treated. paravertebral block may reduce the risk of chronic pain after breast cancer surgery in about one out of every five women treated. our conclusions are significantly weakened by performance bias, shortcomings in allocation concealment, considerable attrition and incomplete outcome data. we caution that our evidence synthesis is based on only a few, small studies. more studies with high methodological quality, addressing various types of surgery and different age groups, including children, are needed.
there is a lack of large, high-quality published rcts evaluating debridement per se, or comparing different methods of debridement for surgical wounds, to guide clinical decision-making.
given the limited evidence base currently available, it is not possible to reach definitive conclusions regarding differences in clinical outcomes in children with severe acute malnutrition who were given home-based ready-to-use therapeutic food (rutf) compared to the standard diet, or who were treated with rutf in different daily amounts or formulations. for this reason, either rutf or flour porridge can be used to treat children at home depending on availability, affordability and practicality. well-designed, adequately powered pragmatic randomised controlled trials of hiv-uninfected and hiv-infected children with severe acute malnutrition are needed.
ecs is an efficacious intervention for the prevention of mtct among hiv-1-infected women not taking arvs or taking only zidovudine. the risk of ppm with ecs is higher than that associated with vaginal delivery, yet lower than with necs. among hiv-1-infected women, more advanced maternal hiv-1 disease stage and concomitant medical conditions (e.g., diabetes) are independent risk factors for ppm. the risk of mtct of hiv-1 according to mode of delivery among hiv-1-infected women with low viral loads (low either because the woman's hiv-1 disease is not advanced, or because her hiv-1 disease is well-controlled with arvs) is unclear. therefore, an important issue to be addressed in one or more large studies (individual studies or an individual patient data meta-analysis combining data from more than one study) is assessment of the effectiveness of ecs for prevention of mtct of hiv-1 among hiv-1-infected women with undetectable viral loads (with or without receipt of highly active arv therapy (haart)).
there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials to support the routine use of closed suction drainage in orthopaedic surgery. further randomised trials with larger patient numbers are required for different operations before definite conclusions can be made for all types of orthopaedic operations.
it is uncertain whether supervision has a substantive, positive effect on the quality of primary health care in low- and middle-income countries. the long term effectiveness of supervision is unknown.
airline passengers similar to those in this review can expect a substantial reduction in the incidence of symptomless dvt and leg oedema if they wear compression stockings. we cannot assess the effect of wearing stockings on death, pulmonary embolus or symptomatic dvt because no such events occurred in these trials. randomized trials to assess these outcomes would need to include a very large number of people.
the evidence found was insufficient to demonstrate any superiority of stapled over handsewn techniques in colorectal anastomosis surgery, regardless of the level of anastomosis. there were no randomised clinical trials comparing these two types of anastomosis in elective conditions in the last decade. the relevance of this research question has possibly lost its strength where elective surgery is concerned. however, in risk situations, such as emergency surgery, trauma and inflammatory bowel disease, new clinical trials are needed.
there was currently no evidence to support that tpo receptor agonists are effective in chronic itp. compared to placebo or soc, despite significantly increased platelet response, there was no evidence to demonstrate that tpo receptor agonists did improve significant bleeding events in chronic itp. the effect on overall survival awaits further analysis. although long-term studies are lacking, current data demonstrated adverse effects of tpo receptor agonists were similar to that of placebo and soc.
this review was unable to draw firm conclusions for the role of psychological interventions for children with asthma. this review demonstrates the absence of an adequate evidence base and highlights the need for well-conducted and reported randomised trials in this area.
there is limited evidence supporting early commencement of weight-bearing and the use of a removable type of immobilisation to allow exercise during the immobilisation period after surgical fixation. because of the potential increased risk of adverse events, the patient's ability to comply with the use of a removable type of immobilisation to enable controlled exercise is essential. there is little evidence for rehabilitation interventions during the immobilisation period after conservative orthopaedic management and no evidence for stretching, manual therapy or exercise compared to usual care following the immobilisation period. small, single studies showed that some electrotherapy modalities may be beneficial. more clinical trials that are well-designed and adequately-powered are required to strengthen current evidence.
the place of relaxin, either purified porcine or recombinant human, as an induction or cervical priming agent is unclear. further trials are needed to estimate the true effect of relaxin within current clinical practice. [note: the three citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
we found no convincing evidence to support routine drain use after gastrectomy for gastric cancer.
psh/gsh may have some utility as a first step in treatment and may have potential as an alternative to formal therapist-delivered psychological therapy. future research should focus on producing large well-conducted studies of self-help treatments in eating disorders including health economic evaluations, different types and modes of delivering self-help (e.g. computerised versus manual-based) and different populations and settings.
at present, there is insufficient evidence to assess the effects of steroid therapy in the management of meconium aspiration syndrome. a further large randomised controlled trial assessing potential benefits and harm would be required to determine its role.
although alkylating agents have been used for decades they have never actually been tested in a proper randomised trial. this review demonstrated that there is currently no evidence to suggest that alkylating agents are effective in treating waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia.
meta-analysis of currently published randomized controlled trials favors primary repair over fecal diversion for penetrating colon injuries.
relaxation techniques were more effective at reducing self-rated depressive symptoms than no or minimal treatment. however, they were not as effective as psychological treatment. data on clinician-rated depressive symptoms were less conclusive. further research is required to investigate the possibility of relaxation being used as a first-line treatment in a stepped care approach to managing depression, especially in younger populations and populations with subthreshold or first episodes of depression.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate a policy of routine antibiotic prophylaxis to women with incomplete abortion.
antipsychotics might be used as an add-on therapy in the treatment of painful conditions. nevertheless, extrapyramidal and sedating side effects have to be considered before using antipsychotics for treating painful conditions. results for antipsychotics in the treatment of different painful conditions are mixed and most sample sizes in the reviewed rcts are small. further studies on atypical antipsychotics in larger double-blind placebo-controlled studies including standardised pain assessment/documentation are warranted.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the effect of cerebrolysin on survival and dependency in people with acute ischaemic stroke. high-quality and large-scale randomised controlled trials may help to gain a better understanding of the potential value of cerebrolysin in acute ischaemic stroke.
there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the effectiveness of specific therapeutic interventions for motor apraxia after stroke. further research of higher quality is required. as we did not review whether patients with apraxia benefit from rehabilitation input in general, they should continue to receive general stroke rehabilitation services.
the quality and quantity of information extracted from the trials performed to date are insufficient to make any firm conclusion on the optimum choice of surgical approach in adult patients undergoing primary tha for oa.
amantadine and rimantadine have comparable efficacy and effectiveness in relieving or treating symptoms of influenza a in healthy adults, although rimantadine induces fewer adverse effects than amantadine. the effectiveness of both drugs in interrupting transmission is probably low. resistance of influenza viruses to amantadine is a serious worldwide problem as shown by recent virological surveillances. both drugs have adverse gastrointestinal (stomach and gut) effects, but amantadine can also have serious effects on the nervous system. they should only be used in an emergency when all other measures fail.
this systematic review indicates that music interventions may have beneficial effects on anxiety, pain, mood, and qol in people with cancer. furthermore, music may have a small effect on heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure. most trials were at high risk of bias and, therefore, these results need to be interpreted with caution.
bladder neck needle suspension surgery is probably not as good as open abdominal retropubic suspension for the treatment of primary and secondary urodynamic stress incontinence because the cure rates were lower in the trials reviewed. however, the reliability of the evidence was limited by poor quality and small trials. there was not enough information to comment on comparisons with suburethral sling operations. although cure rates were similar after needle suspension compared with after anterior vaginal repair, the data were insufficient to be reliable and inadequate to compare morbidity.
the available evidence supports the need for chemical sclerosants for successful pleurodesis, the use of talc as the sclerosant of choice, and thoracoscopic pleurodesis as the preferred technique for pleurodesis based on efficacy. there was no evidence for an increase in mortality following talc pleurodesis.
comparisons between the higher and lower training intensity were limited due to the small number of included studies and participants. consequently, there are insufficient data to draw any conclusions on exercise capacity, symptoms and hrqol for this comparison. for comparisons between continuous and interval training, both appear to be equally effective in improving exercise capacity, symptoms and hrqol.
antibiotic treatment led to a statistically significant reduction of children with aom experiencing pain at two to seven days compared with placebo but since most children (82%) settle spontaneously, about 20 children must be treated to prevent one suffering from ear pain at two to seven days. additionally, antibiotic treatment led to a statistically significant reduction of tympanic membrane perforations (nntb 33) and contralateral aom episodes (nntb 11). these benefits must be weighed against the possible harms: for every 14 children treated with antibiotics, one child experienced an adverse event (such as vomiting, diarrhoea or rash) that would not have occurred if antibiotics had been withheld. antibiotics appear to be most useful in children under two years of age with bilateral aom, or with both aom and otorrhoea. for most other children with mild disease, an expectant observational approach seems justified. we have no trials in populations with higher risks of complications.
we found no significant difference between early and late laparoscopic cholecystectomy on our primary outcomes. however, trials with high risk of bias indicate that early laparoscopic cholecystectomy during acute cholecystitis seems safe and may shorten the total hospital stay. the majority of the important outcomes occurred rarely, and hence the confidence intervals are wide. it is unlikely that future randomised clinical trials will be powered to measure differences in bile duct injury and other serious complications since this might involve performing a trial of more than 50,000 people, but several smaller randomised trials may answer the questions through meta-analyses.
considering the significant methodological flaws in the studies, the small number of patients examined, and the possibility of publication bias, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the efficacy of occupational therapy in parkinson's disease. there is now a consensus as to uk current and best practice in occupational therapy when treating people with parkinson's disease. we now require large well designed placebo-controlled rcts to demonstrate occupational therapy's effectiveness in parkinson's disease. outcome measures with particular relevance to patients, carers, occupational therapists and physicians should be chosen and the patients monitored for at least six months to determine the duration of benefit. the trials should be reported using consort guidelines.
occlusion, whilst wearing necessary refractive correction, appears to be more effective than refractive correction alone in the treatment of strabismic amblyopia. the benefit of combining near activities with occlusion is unproven. no rcts were found that assessed the role of either partial occlusion or optical penalisation to refractive correction for strabismic amblyopia.
folic acid, alone or in combination with vitamins and minerals, prevents ntds but does not have a clear effect on other birth defects.
meta-analysis of small rcts suggests that esa treatment in patients with symptomatic chf and mild anaemia (haemoglobin more than 10g/dl) can improve anaemia and exercise tolerance, reduce symptoms and have benefits on clinical outcomes. confirmation requires well-designed studies with careful attention to dose, haemoglobin treatment target and associated iron therapy.
we based assessment of the efficacy of short (seven days or less) compared to longer duration (more than seven days) systemic corticosteroid therapy for acute exacerbations of copd in this review on four of the seven included studies for which data were available. two studies were fully published and two were published as conference abstracts but trialists were able to supply data requested for the review. the finding in this review that there is no significant increase in treatment failure with shorter systemic corticosteroid treatment for seven days or less for acute exacerbations of copd, does not give conclusive evidence to recommend change in clinical practice due to a wide confidence interval around the estimate of effect. the four studies which contributed to the meta-analysis were of relatively low quality and five of the seven studies were not published as full articles. thus there are insufficient data to allow firm conclusions concerning the optimal duration of corticosteroid therapy of acute exacerbations of copd to be drawn.
there is a lack of research evaluating the effects on mrsa transmission of infection prevention and control strategies in nursing homes. rigorous studies should be conducted in nursing homes, to test interventions that have been specifically designed for this unique environment.
in view of the lack of data from randomized trials concerning effects on important clinical outcomes, routine or sustained use of systemic loop diuretics in infants with (or developing) cld cannot be recommended based on current evidence. randomized trials are needed to assess the effects of furosemide administration on survival, duration of ventilatory support and oxygen administration, length of hospital stay, potential complications and long-term outcome.
paternal cell immunization, third party donor leukocytes, trophoblast membranes, and intravenous immune globulin provide no significant beneficial effect over placebo in improving the live birth rate.
oral naftidrofuryl has a statistically significant and clinically meaningful, although moderate, effect of improving walking distance in the six months after initiation of therapy for people with intermittent claudication. access by researchers to data from rcts that are suitable for ipd analysis should be possible through repositories of data from pharmacological trials. regular formal appraisal of the balance of risk and benefit is needed for older pharmaceutical products.
the evidence suggests that probiotics are not an effective treatment for eczema, and probiotic treatment carries a small risk of adverse events.
there is evidence from a single rct that tgi may reduce the duration of mechanical ventilation in preterm infants - although the data from this small study do not give sufficient evidence to support the introduction of tgi into clinical practice. the technical requirements for performing tgi (as performed in the single included study) are great. there is no statistically significant reduction in the total duration of respiratory support or hospital stay. tgi cannot be recommended for general use at this time.
the available evidence suggests that antidepressants are superior to placebo in treating gad. there is evidence from one trial suggesting that paroxetine and imipramine have a similar efficacy and tolerability. there is also evidence from placebo-controlled trials suggesting that these drugs are well tolerated by gad patients. further trials of antidepressants for gad will help to demonstrate which antidepressants should be used for which patients.
there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials on the effectiveness of macular translocation, which is also not free of important risks. furthermore, this technique is difficult to perform and a long surgical training is required. future studies might include patients with small neovascular lesions that failed to respond to current pharmacological therapies and are willing to accept the risks associated with surgery to try to improve visual acuity.
based upon the limited evidence available, anticoagulant treatment for cerebral venous sinus thrombosis appeared to be safe and was associated with a potentially important reduction in the risk of death or dependency which did not reach statistical significance.
tocilizumab is beneficial in decreasing ra disease activity and improving function. tocilizumab treatment was associated with significant increase in cholesterol levels and in total adverse events. larger safety studies are needed to address these safety concerns.
the evidence from only prospective cohort trials is considered to be too weak to be able to draw a definite conclusion about the preventive effect of whole grain foods on the development of t2dm. properly designed long-term randomised controlled trials are needed. to facilitate this, further mechanistic research should focus on finding a set of relevant intermediate endpoints for t2dm and on identifying genetic subgroups of the population at risk that are most susceptible to dietary intervention.
the prophylactic use of vitamin c to prevent pneumonia should be further investigated in populations who have high incidence of pneumonia, especially if dietary vitamin c intake is low. similarly, the therapeutic effects of vitamin c should be studied, especially in patients with low plasma vitamin c levels. the current evidence is too weak to advocate widespread prophylactic use of vitamin c to prevent pneumonia in the general population. however, therapeutic vitamin c supplementation may be reasonable for pneumonia patients who have low vitamin c plasma levels because its cost and risks are low.
miniport laparoscopic cholecystectomy can be completed successfully in more than 85% of patients. patients, in whom elective miniport laparoscopic cholecystectomy was completed successfully, had lower pain than those who underwent standard laparoscopic cholecystectomy. however, because of the lack of information on its safety, miniport laparoscopic cholecystectomy cannot be recommended outside well-designed, randomised clinical trials.
current limited data show that culture-specific programmes for adults and children from minority groups with asthma, are more effective than generic programmes in improving most (quality of life, asthma knowledge, asthma exacerbations, asthma control) but not all asthma outcomes. this evidence is limited by the small number of included studies and the lack of reported outcomes. further trials are required to answer this question conclusively.
we found no evidence that anti-viral agents have a beneficial effect on outcomes in ramsay hunt syndrome, despite their widespread use in this condition. the use of these drugs in patients with herpes zoster infections in other parts of the body might suggest that they have a role in herpes zoster oticus. as usual, the absence of positive evidence of benefit (or, in this case, the 'negative' result of one small, statistically under-powered study) does not necessarily indicate that antivirals are ineffective. however, these drugs are associated with a number of adverse effects and this must be taken into consideration when undertaking the requisite risk-benefit analysis before instigating treatment.
there is current evidence supporting that case management can enhance linkage with other services. however, evidence that case management reduces drug use or produce other beneficial outcome is not conclusive.
evidence on clinical benefits of dehumidification using mechanical ventilation with dehumidifiers remains scanty, and the addition of a new double blind trial to this review does not indicate significant benefit in most measure of control of asthma from such environmental interventions.
based on the results of pregnancy rate per couple in five trials, double intrauterine insemination resulted in significant benefit over single intrauterine insemination in the treatment of subfertile couples with husband semen. if advice is to be offered regarding clinical practice, further research is warranted.
there is no evidence to support the routine use of aminosteroids in the management of traumatic head injury. on the basis of the existing evidence from randomised trials of aminosteroids in head injury, it is not possible to refute the possibility of moderate but potentially clinically important benefits or harms. a further randomised controlled trial of tirilazad mesylate with 1156 participants has been completed, the results of which should become available in the near future.
overall, this review found low quality evidence that neither supported nor refuted the benefits of any specific wi for pain relief and moderate quality evidence that a multiple-component intervention reduced sickness absence in the intermediate-term, which was not sustained over time. further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate. there is an urgent need for high quality rcts with well designed wis.
the review shows that overall there is a positive effect of speech and language therapy interventions for children with expressive phonological and expressive vocabulary difficulties. the evidence for expressive syntax difficulties is more mixed, and there is a need for further research to investigate intervention for receptive language difficulties. there is a large degree of heterogeneity in the results, and the sources of this need to be investigated.
exercise can result in a significant and clinically meaningful improvement in shoulder rom in women with breast cancer. in the post-operative period, consideration should be given to early implementation of exercises, although this approach may need to be carefully weighed against the potential for increases in wound drainage volume and duration. high quality research studies that closely monitor exercise prescription factors (e.g. intensity), and address persistent upper-limb dysfunction are needed.
there is limited evidence from randomised controlled trials to inform best practice for fetal surveillance regimens when caring for women with pregnancies affected by impaired fetal growth. more studies are needed to evaluate the effects of currently used fetal surveillance regimens in impaired fetal growth.
serenoa repens, at double and triple doses, did not improve urinary flow measures or prostate size in men with lower urinary tract symptoms consistent with bph.
this review does not provide sufficient evidence on which to base practice. although preoxygenation was shown to decrease hypoxemia at the time of suctioning, this result comes from only one small poor quality trial in which other clinically important outcomes were not assessed. further studies are needed.
this review confirms that steroid avoidance and steroid withdrawal strategies in kidney transplantation are not associated with increased mortality or graft loss despite an increase in acute rejection. these immunosuppression strategies may allow safe steroid avoidance or elimination a few days after kidney transplantation if antibody induction treatment is prescribed or after three to six months if such induction is not used.
the use of a single antidepressant agent was clinically effective for the treatment of bulimia nervosa when compared to placebo, with an overall greater remission rate but a higher rate of dropouts. no differential effect regarding efficacy and tolerability among the various classes of antidepressants could be demonstrated.
there is no clear evidence that antenatal ctg improves perinatal outcome, but further studies focusing on the use of computerised ctg in specific populations of women with increased risk of complications are warranted.
this systematic review summarises the evidence regarding width of excision margins for primary cutaneous melanoma. none of the five published trials, nor our meta-analysis, showed a statistically significant difference in overall survival between narrow or wide excision. the summary estimate for overall survival favoured wide excision by a small degree [hazard ratio 1.04; 95% confidence interval 0.95 to 1.15; p = 0.40], but the result was not significantly different. this result is compatible with both a 5% relative reduction in overall mortality favouring narrower excision and a 15% relative reduction in overall mortality favouring wider excision. therefore, a small (but potentially important) difference in overall survival between wide and narrow excision margins cannot be confidently ruled out. the summary estimate for recurrence free survival favoured wide excision [hazard ratio 1.13; p = 0.06; 95% confidence interval 0.99 to 1.28] but again the result did not reach statistical significance (p < 0.05 level). current randomised trial evidence is insufficient to address optimal excision margins for primary cutaneous melanoma.
currently, there is no evidence of an effect of vaginal disinfection on the risk of mtct of hiv. given its simplicity and low cost, there is need for a large well-designed and well-conducted randomised controlled trial to assess the additive effect of vaginal disinfection on the risk of mtct of hiv in antiretroviral treated women.
the evidence on the use of email for the provision of information on disease prevention and health promotion was weak, and therefore inadequate to inform clinical practice. the available trials mostly provide inconclusive, or no evidence for the outcomes of interest in this review. future research needs to use high-quality study designs that take advantage of the most recent developments in information technology, with consideration of the complexity of email as an intervention.
the 2010 update found evidence on laxatives for management of constipation remains limited due to insufficient rcts. however, the conclusions of this update have changed since the original review publication in that it now includes evidence on methylnaltrexone. here it found that subcutaneous methylnaltrexone is effective in inducing laxation in palliative care patients with opioid-induced constipation and where conventional laxatives have failed. however, the safety of this product is not fully evaluated. large, rigorous, independent trials are needed.
results suggest that some internet-based interventions can assist smoking cessation, especially if the information is appropriately tailored to the users and frequent automated contacts with the users are ensured, however trials did not show consistent effects.
trials evaluating silicon gel sheeting as a treatment for hypertrophic and keloid scarring are of poor quality and highly susceptible to bias. there is weak evidence of a benefit of silicon gel sheeting as a prevention for abnormal scarring in high risk individuals but the poor quality of research means a great deal of uncertainty prevails.
over 2 months of treatment, ssris are no more efficacious than placebo in patients with migraine. in patients with chronic tth, ssris are less efficacious than tricyclic antidepressants. in comparison with ssris, the burden of adverse events in patients receiving tricyclics was greater. these results are based on short-term trials and may not generalise to longer-term treatment.
some herbal medicines may have cholesterol-lowering effects. our findings have to be interpreted with caution due to high or unclear risk of bias of the included trials.
sulfasalazine appears to have a clinically and statistically significant benefit on the disease activity of patients with ra. its effects on overall health status and radiological progression are not clear at this time, but would appear to be modest.
from the data reported in clinical trials, it would be understandable if those suffering from schizophrenia, who are willing to take flupenthixol decanoate, would request the standard dose rather than the high dose. in the current state of evidence, there is nothing to choose between flupenthixol decanoate and other depot antipsychotics. the choice of which depot to use must therefore be based on clinical judgement and the preferences of people with schizophrenia and their carers. managers and policy makers should expect better data than the research community has provided thus far. this review highlighted the need for large, well-designed and reported randomised clinical trials to address the effects of flupenthixol decanoate, in particular when compared to oral antipsychotics. future studies should also consider hospital and service outcomes, satisfaction with care and record economic data.
data are limited because trials are small. there are no obvious differences between tetracycline, doxycycline, telithromycin,or azithromycin; rifampicin may be better than tetracycline in areas where scrub typhus appears to respond poorly to standard anti-rickettsial drugs.
oral mefenamic acid 500 mg was effective at treating moderate to severe acute postoperative pain, based on limited data. efficacy of other doses, and safety and tolerability could not be assessed.
the token economy approach may have effects on negative symptoms but it is unclear if these results are reproducible, clinically meaningful and are maintained beyond the treatment programme. token economy remains worthy of careful evaluation in well designed, conducted and reported randomised trials.
this review provides some evidence that there is a cost saving but no significant difference in outcome or risk of postoperative complications between day care and in-patient cataract surgery. this is based on one detailed and methodologically sound trial conducted in the developed world. the success, safety and cost-effectiveness of cataract surgery as a day care procedure appear to be acceptable. future research may well focus on evidence provided by high quality clinical databases and registers which would enable clinicians and healthcare planners to agree clinical and social indications for in-patient care and so make better use of resources, by selecting day case surgery unless these criteria are met.
the evidence from the five small placebo-controlled trials included in this review does not support the use of ultrasound in the treatment of acute ankle sprains. the potential treatment effects of ultrasound appear to be generally small and of probably of limited clinical importance, especially in the context of the usually short-term recovery period for these injuries. however, the available evidence is insufficient to rule out the possibility that there is an optimal dosage schedule for ultrasound therapy that may be of benefit.
evidence from a single randomised trial of non-invasive ventilation in 41 participants suggests that it significantly prolongs survival and improves or maintains quality of life in people with als. survival and some measures of quality of life were significantly improved in the subgroup of people with better bulbar function, but not in those with severe bulbar impairment. future studies should examine the health economics of niv and factors influencing access to niv. we need to understand the factors, personal and socioeconomic, that determine access to niv.
we did not find support for an effect of dance/movement therapy on body image. the findings of one study suggest that dance/movement therapy may have a beneficial effect on qol. however, the limited number of studies prevents us from drawing conclusions concerning the effects of dance/movement therapy on psychological and physical outcomes in cancer patients.
the no-scalpel approach to the vas resulted in less bleeding, hematoma, infection, and pain as well as a shorter operation time than the traditional incision technique. no difference in effectiveness was found between the two approaches.
helmets reduce bicycle-related head and facial injuries for bicyclists of all ages involved in all types of crashes, including those involving motor vehicles. our response to comments from critics are presented in the feedback section.
there are two included studies which reported results for cognitive function. one study demonstrated a modest treatment effect in cognitive function as assessed by adas-cog13 but not for other outcomes assessing different domains of cognitive function. donepezil was associated with significantly more adverse effects compared with placebo, mostly gastrointestinal. from the second study, there is no evidence that donepezil delays the onset of ad. there is no evidence to support the use of donepezil for patients with mci. the putative benefits are minor, short lived and associated with significant side effects.
there is no evidence from this review to make definitive conclusions about which method of uterine closure offers greater advantages, if any. however, these results are based on too few and too small studies to detect differences in rare, but severe, complications. [note: the 12 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the upper bound of the 95% ci of abt for cure within two weeks without major complications crosses the 20% margin of appendectomy, so the outcome is inconclusive. also the quality of the studies was low to moderate, for that reason the results should be interpret with caution and definite conclusions cannot be made. therefore we conclude that appendectomy remains the standard treatment for acute appendicitis. antibiotic treatment might be used as an alternative treatment in a good quality rct or in specific patients or conditions were surgery is contraindicated.
although pergolide is superior to bromocriptine in reducing motor impairments and disability, no firm conclusions regarding levodopa-induced motor complications can be reached. levodopa dose reduction, adverse events and withdrawals from treatment are similar for the two agonists. the small advantage of pergolide in efficacy does not take into account its additional cost compared with bromocriptine.
based on the limited number of published rcts, the systolic/diastolic blood pressure lowering effect of loop diuretics is modest (-8/-4 mmhg) and is likely an overestimate due to the high risk of bias in the included studies. there are no clinically meaningful bp lowering differences between different drugs within the loop diuretic class. the dose ranging effects of loop diuretics could not be evaluated. the review did not provide a good estimate of the incidence of harms associated with loop diuretics because of the short duration of the trials and the lack of reporting of adverse effects in many of the trials.
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether iron therapy is beneficial for the treatment of rls. further research to determine whether some or all types of rls patients may benefit from iron therapy, as well as the best route of iron administration, is needed.
the available evidence fails to identify any one superior regimen for the treatment of te. the choice of therapy will often be directed by available therapy. given the current evidence, tmp-smx appears to be an effective alternative therapy for te in resource-poor settings where p+s are not available.
this review is not able to provide any evidence that nicotine is or is not a useful treatment for alzheimer´s disease.
treating healthy persons (60 years or older) with moderate to severe systolic and/or diastolic hypertension reduces all cause mortality and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. the decrease in all cause mortality was limited to persons 60 to 80 years of age.
the use of intravenous aminophylline did not result in significant additional bronchodilation compared to standard care with inhaled beta2-agonists in patients experiencing an asthma exacerbation in the ed setting, or in a significant reduction in the risk of hospital admission. for every 100 people treated with aminophylline an additional 20 people had vomiting and 15 people arrhythmias or palpitations. no subgroups in which aminophylline might be more effective were identified. our update in 2012 is consistent with the original conclusions that the risk-benefit balance of intravenous aminophylline is unfavourable.
current evidence suggests nebulized 3% saline may significantly reduce the length of hospital stay among infants hospitalized with non-severe acute viral bronchiolitis and improve the clinical severity score in both outpatient and inpatient populations.
restrictive episiotomy policies appear to have a number of benefits compared to policies based on routine episiotomy. there is less posterior perineal trauma, less suturing and fewer complications, no difference for most pain measures and severe vaginal or perineal trauma, but there was an increased risk of anterior perineal trauma with restrictive episiotomy.
there are no changes to the conclusions since the original version of the review was published in issue 2, 2009. due to insufficient extractable data in the studies included in this review, we are unable to make any definitive conclusions about the effectiveness of tens as an isolated treatment for acute pain in adults.
the efficacy of ifn beta treatment on preventing the conversion from cis to cdms was confirmed over two years of follow-up. since patients had some clinical heterogeneity (length of follow-up, clinical findings of initial attack), it could be useful for the clinical practice to further analyse the efficacy of ifn beta treatment in different patient subgroups.
although there are a considerable number of anecdotal accounts indicating the benefits of using hypnosis in paediatric dentistry, on the basis of the three studies meeting the inclusion criteria for this review there is not yet enough evidence to suggest its beneficial effects.
the data are too few to say if vitamin c supplementation either alone or in combination with other supplements is beneficial during pregnancy. preterm birth may have been increased with vitamin c supplementation. [note: the 32 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is evidence that acarbose reduces the incidence of type 2 diabetes in patients with igt. however, it is unclear whether this should be seen as prevention, delay or masking of diabetes. acarbose may prevent the occurrence of cardiovascular events, but this finding needs to be confirmed in more studies.
there is insufficient data to allow conclusions to be drawn about the relative effectiveness of tep compared with tapp. efforts should be made to start and complete adequately powered rcts, which compare the different methods of laparoscopic repair.
the identified randomised trials do not show an important benefit on language development and behaviour from screening of the general population of asymptomatic children in the first four years of life for ome. however, these trials were all conducted in developed countries. evidence generated in the developed world, where children may enjoy better nutrition, better living conditions and less severe and different infections, may not be applicable to children in developing countries. the screening aspect of some of these studies was aimed primarily at identifying suitable children in whom to evaluate the effects of treatment, rather than to evaluate the effects of screening programmes. younger children and children with milder disease may have been included in these treatment trials compared to children who are offered treatment in pragmatic settings.
in some trials, foot care knowledge and self reported patient behaviour seem to be positively influenced by education in the short term. yet, based on the only two sufficiently powered studies reporting the effect of patient education on primary end points, we conclude that there is insufficient robust evidence that limited patient education alone is effective in achieving clinically relevant reductions in ulcer and amputation incidence.
intravenous iloprost is effective in the treatment of raynaud's phenomenon secondary to scleroderma at decreasing the frequency and severity of attacks and preventing or healing digital ulcers. the effect seems to be prolonged after the intravenous infusion is given. oral iloprost may have less efficacy than intravenous iloprost. however, cisaprost has minimal or no efficacy when given orally for the treatment of raynaud's phenomenon secondary to scleroderma.
one small trial of short duration found no statistically significant effect of garlic on walking distance.
t-tube drainage appears to result in significantly longer operating time and hospital stay as compared with primary closure without any evidence of benefit after laparoscopic common bile duct exploration. based on currently available evidence, there is no justification for the routine use of t-tube drainage after laparoscopic common bile duct exploration in patients with common bile duct stones. more randomised trials comparing the effects of t-tube drainage versus primary closure after laparoscopic common bile duct exploration may be needed. such trials should be conducted with low risk of bias, assessing the long-term beneficial and harmful effects including long-term complications such as bile stricture and recurrence of common bile duct stones.
the current evidence does not support screening for lung cancer with chest radiography or sputum cytology. annual low-dose ct screening is associated with a reduction in lung cancer mortality in high-risk smokers but further data are required on the cost effectiveness of screening and the relative harms and benefits of screening across a range of different risk groups and settings.
when the balance of efficacy and toxicity is taken into account, the moderate level of evidence from our systematic review showed no statistically significant advantage of the mtx combination versus monotherapy. trials are needed that compare currently used mtx doses and combination therapies.
imiquimod appears to be effective, but its safety needs further examination. its use is associated with side effects which are tolerable, but more extensive data on adverse effects are required. long term follow-up should be mandatory in view of the known progression of high grade vin to invasive disease. alternative medical interventions, such as cidofovir, should be explored.
a policy of labour induction compared with expectant management is associated with fewer perinatal deaths and fewer caesarean sections. some infant morbidities such as meconium aspiration syndrome were also reduced with a policy of post-term labour induction although no significant differences in the rate of nicu admission were seen. however, the absolute risk of perinatal death is small. women should be appropriately counselled in order to make an informed choice between scheduled induction for a post-term pregnancy or monitoring without induction (or delayed induction).
continuous support during labour has clinically meaningful benefits for women and infants and no known harm. all women should have support throughout labour and birth.
overall the results show that for most of the studies included in this review, certain forms of chemotherapy plus supportive care improve both survival and quality of life in patients with gastrointestinal cancer (gastric and colorectal cancers) compared to receiving supportive care alone. trials involving bsc/sc in patients with advanced gastrointestinal cancer require careful evaluation. oncologists and researchers alike should strive for improvements in trial design and reporting. future trials should focus on clearer definitions of supportive care. the eortc definition of supportive care can be used as a guide. bsc/sc trials should use standardised validated outcome measures for symptom control, quality of life, toxicity and other useful palliative measures.
current evidence regarding the effect of adenoidectomy on recurrent or chronic nasal symptoms or nasal obstruction alone is sparse, inconclusive and has a significant risk of bias. high quality trials assessing the effectiveness of adenoidectomy in children with recurrent or chronic nasal symptoms should be initiated.
despite many rcts of corticosteroid injections for shoulder pain, their small sample sizes, variable methodological quality and heterogeneity means that there is little overall evidence to guide treatment. subacromial corticosteroid injection for rotator cuff disease and intra-articular injection for adhesive capsulitis may be beneficial although their effect may be small and not well-maintained. there is a need for further trials investigating the efficacy of corticosteroid injections for shoulder pain. other important issues that remain to be clarified include whether the accuracy of needle placement, anatomical site, frequency, dose and type of corticosteroid influences efficacy.
the data from this review suggest that the use of progestogens is effective in the treatment of threatened miscarriage with no evidence of increased rates of pregnancy-induced hypertension or antepartum haemorrhage as harmful effects to the mother, nor increased occurrence of congenital abnormalities on the newborn. however, the analysis was limited by the small number and the poor methodological quality of eligible studies (four studies) and the small number of the participants (421), which limit the power of the meta-analysis and hence of this conclusion.
mindful of the weak evidence based on a small number of studies of limited quality, the results of this review suggest that communicating dna-based disease risk estimates has little or no effect on smoking and physical activity. it may have a small effect on self-reported diet and on intentions to change behaviour. claims that receiving dna-based test results motivates people to change their behaviour are not supported by evidence. larger and better-quality rcts are needed.
this review demonstrates higher a proportion of sustained virological response after extension of treatment from 48 weeks to 72 weeks in hcv genotype 1 infected patients in whom hcv rna was still detectable but decreased by ≥ 2 log after 12 weeks and became negative after 24 weeks of treatment, and in patients with detectable hcv rna after four weeks of treatment with peginterferon plus ribavirin. the observed intervention effects can be caused by both systematic error (bias) and random errors (play of chance). there was no reporting on mortality and the reporting of clinical outcomes and adverse events was insufficient. more data are needed in order to recommend or reject the policy of extending the treatment period for slow responders.
overall, this review did not identify a statistically significant difference between these two methods for delivering bronchodilator therapy to children with acute asthma or lower airways obstruction attacks. care should be taken in the interpretation and applicability of our results because of the small number of rcts along with few events available meeting the criteria for inclusion in the review, absence of the primary outcome of interest and other clinically important outcomes in the majority of included studies. the possible need for a face-mask in younger children using home-made spacers should also be considered in practice.
the results of this review suggest that an individual home-based or supervised exercise program is better than no intervention; that supervised group physiotherapy is better than home exercises; and that combined inpatient spa-exercise therapy followed by group physiotherapy is better than group physiotherapy alone.
there was no evidence of significant benefit or harm from drugs modulating excitatory amino acid action. reduction of death or dependence by 8% or more has been excluded for gavestinel and lubeluzole, which contribute most of the data for this review. however, mechanistic understanding of neuroprotection is too poor to extrapolate from these two failed development plans to all glutamate modulators. further clinical trials of neuroprotective agents remain justified, since confidence limits around estimates of effect remain wide for most agents, and cannot reliably exclude benefit. although numbers of patients are too small to confirm or refute a trend towards increased mortality with some nmda antagonists, further commercial development of these agents is exceedingly unlikely.
there are currently insufficient data to confidently inform clinical practice. the limitations of these studies are plentiful and the risk of bias is high. these trials, however, are invaluable guides for current and future study design. well conducted randomised trials are possible. some may be underway. current practice outside of well designed randomised trials should be clearly justified.
although no clinically important differences between ort and ivt, the ort group did have a higher risk of paralytic ileus, and the ivt group was exposed to risks of intravenous therapy. for every 25 children (95% ci 14 to 100) treated with ort one would fail and require ivt.
the results from this review indicate a small mean improvement in health-related quality of life for patients on a combination of tiotropium and long-acting beta2-agonist compared to tiotropium alone, but it is not clear how clinically important this mean difference may be. hospital admission and mortality have not been shown to be altered by adding long-acting beta2-agonists to tiotropium. there were not enough data to determine the relative efficacy and safety of tiotropium plus long-acting beta2-agonist compared to long-acting beta2-agonist alone. there were insufficient data to make comparisons between the different long-acting beta2-agonists when used in addition to tiotropium.
for reasonably well, stable people it may mean that the need for regular oral doses can be avoided, but adverse affects are not well reported. for more severely ill people, few benefits are evident although it may increase compliance with injections in comparison with placebo. use of depot risperidone, especially at the higher doses, is weakly associated with movement disorders. well designed and reported, randomised studies, firmly grounded in real world clinical practice are needed to fully assess the effects of this new preparation.
clinicians should be aware of the variability in the performance of different nebuliser systems. technologies such as adaptive aerosol delivery and vibrating mesh technology have advantages over conventional systems in terms of treatment time, deposition as a percentage of priming dose, patient preference and adherence. there is a need for long-term randomised controlled trials of these technologies to determine patient-focused outcomes (such as quality of life and burden of care), safe and effective dosing levels of medications and clinical outcomes (such as hospitalisations and need for antibiotics) and an economic evaluation of their use.
short binasal prong devices are more effective than single prongs in reducing the rate of re-intubation. although the infant flow driver appears more effective than medicorp prongs the most effective short binasal prong device remains to be determined. the improvement in respiratory parameters with short binasal prongs suggests they are more effective than nasopharyngeal cpap in the treatment of early rds. further studies incorporating longer-term outcomes are required. studies are also needed to determine the optimal pressure source for the delivery of ncpap.
there is not sufficient evidence to support or reject the use of chlorambucil for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. chlorambucil may show benefit in some unvalidated surrogate outcome measures (for example, serum bilirubin and immunoglobulin m levels). chlorambucil is, however, connected with a number of adverse events. bone marrow suppression should be noted in particular. further randomised clinical trials are necessary to assess the benefits and harms of chlorambucil in this indication.
the data available to evaluate the efficacy or potential hazards of outpatient induction are limited. it is, therefore, not yet possible to determine whether induction of labour is effective and safe in outpatient settings. [note: the four citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
implications for clinical practice: the controlled trials that have been identified raise the possibility that prophylactic granulocyte transfusions at a dose of at least 1 x 1010 may reduce the risk of mortality from infection. overall mortality was not affected. however, the majority of studies were performed decades ago, and standards of supportive care have advanced considerably. these earlier trials were also based on transfusing lower yields of collected granulocytes than currently recommended. it is difficult to recommend prophylactic granulocyte transfusions outside the setting of ongoing controlled trials, given the resource and cost implications. implications for research: larger trials are needed to establish the validity of the potential benefits raised by this review, in view of the methodological limitations, the small sample sizes and the heterogeneous definitions of infection that were encountered in the included studies.
prazosin is modestly effective in the treatment of raynaud's phenomenon secondary to scleroderma.
there is insufficient data to show that problems of early expulsions have been overcome with the modified introducer used in gynefix. apart from that, the frameless device performs similarly to tcu380, and appears to have a lower pregnancy rate in later years, although the absolute difference is small.
the evidence available indicates that milnacipran 100 mg or 200 mg is effective for a minority in the treatment of pain due to fibromyalgia, providing moderate levels of pain relief (at least 30%) to about 40% of participants, compared with about 30% with placebo. there were insufficient data to assess substantial levels of pain relief (at least 50%), and the use of last observation carried forward imputation may overestimate drug efficacy. milnacipran is associated with increased adverse events and adverse event withdrawals, which were significantly greater for the higher dose. there were no data for the use of milnacipran for other chronic neuropathic pain conditions.
there was no clear evidence that oscillation was a more or less effective intervention overall than other forms of physiotherapy. more adequately-powered long-term randomised controlled trials are necessary.
advance provision of emergency contraception did not reduce pregnancy rates when compared to conventional provision. results from primary analyses suggest that advance provision does not negatively impact sexual and reproductive health behaviors and outcomes. women should have easy access to emergency contraception, because it can decrease the chance of pregnancy. however, the interventions tested thus far have not reduced overall pregnancy rates in the populations studied.
there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that aerobic exercise in adults with down syndrome improves physical or psychosocial outcomes . although evidence exists to support improvements in physiological and psychological aspects from strategies using mixed physical activity programmes, well-conducted research examining long-term physical outcomes, adverse effects, psychosocial outcomes and costs is required before informed practice decisions can be made.
higher dose of oxytocin starting and increment dose (4 mu per minute or more) was associated with a reduction in the length of labour and in caesarean section, and an increase in spontaneous vaginal birth. however, there is insufficient evidence. the number of studies and the quality of the available evidence is of concern. additionally, there is insufficient evidence for other maternal and neonatal outcomes, and how women feel about the higher doses of oxytocin. therefore, no firm recommendation can be made. further research should evaluate the effect of high dose oxytocin for women delayed in labour and should include these outcomes.
this review provides evidence that co-formulated abacavir-lamivudine-zidovudine remains a viable option for initiating antiretroviral therapy, especially in hiv-infected patients with pre-existing hyperlipidaemia. the varied geographical locations of the included trials augment the external validity of these findings. we are moderately confident in our estimate of the treatment effects of the triple nrti regimen as initial therapy for hiv infection. in the context of the grade approach, such moderate quality of evidence implies that the true effects of the regimen are likely to be close to the estimate of effects found in this review; but there is a possibility that they could be substantially different. further research should be geared towards defining the subgroup of hiv patients for whom this regimen will be most beneficial.
the current evidence derived from a small number of participants does not indicate that inhalation of dornase alfa after airway clearance techniques is more or less effective than the traditional recommendation to inhale nebulised dornase alfa 30 minutes prior to airway clearance techniques, for most outcomes. for children with well-preserved lung function, inhalation before airway clearance may be more beneficial for small airway function than inhalation after. however, this result relied on a measure with high variability and studies with variable follow up. in the absence of strong evidence to indicate that one timing regimen is better than another, the timing of dornase alpha inhalation can be largely based on pragmatic reasons or individual preference with respect to the time of airway clearance and time of day. further research is warranted.
there is insufficient evidence to assist clinicians in a rational approach to antispastic treatment for sci. further research is urgently needed to improve the scientific basis of patient care.
there were insufficient data to draw any conclusions about the efficacy of low-concentration capsaicin cream in the treatment of neuropathic pain. the information we have suggests that low-concentration topical capsaicin is without meaningful effect beyond that found in placebo creams; given the potential for bias from small study size, this makes it unlikely that low-concentration topical capsaicin has any meaningful use in clinical practice. local skin irritation, which was often mild and transient but may lead to withdrawal, was common. systemic adverse effects were rare.
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of cinnamon for type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. further trials, which address the issues of allocation concealment and blinding, are now required. the inclusion of other important endpoints, such as health-related quality of life, diabetes complications and costs, is also needed.
preloading prior to traditional high-dose local anaesthetic blocks may have some beneficial fetal and maternal effects in healthy women. low-dose epidural and cse analgesia techniques may reduce the need for preloading. the studies reviewed were too small to show whether preloading is beneficial for women having regional analgesia during labour using the lower-dose local anaesthetics or opioids. further investigation of low-dose epidural or cse (including opioid only) blocks, and the risks and benefits of intravenous preloading for women with pregnancy complications, is required. [note: the five citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
g-csf and gm-csf, when used as a prophylaxis in patients with malignant lymphoma undergoing conventional chemotherapy, reduce the risk of neutropenia, febrile neutropenia and infection. however, based on the randomised trials currently available, there is no evidence that either g-csf or gm-csf provide a significant advantage in terms of complete tumour response, fftf or os.
the evidence summarised in this review is drawn from one large study, and several smaller trials. the findings from the large study indicated that in patients who survive up to three months post-surgery, there were significantly better health status and lung function outcomes in favour of surgery compared with usual medical care. patients identified post hoc as being of high risk of death from surgery were those with particularly impaired lung function and poor diffusing capacity and/or homogenous emphysema. further research should address the effect of this intervention on exacerbations and rate of decline in lung function and health status.
there is currently no firm evidence on which to base treatment of acute guttate psoriasis. studies comparing standard treatment modalities, including phototherapy and topical regimens, are required to enable informed decisions on treatment choices to be made.
at this time, the evidence from the small number of placebo-controlled trials does not support the use of tens in the routine management of chronic lbp. further research is encouraged.
the pooled results of two large trials in nepal and ghana (with almost 95,000 women) do not currently suggest a role for antenatal vitamin a supplementation to reduce maternal or perinatal mortality. however the populations studied were probably different with regard to baseline vitamin a status and there were problems with follow-up of women. there is good evidence that antenatal vitamin a supplementation reduces maternal anaemia for women who live in areas where vitamin a deficiency is common or who are hiv-positive. in addition the available evidence suggests a reduction in maternal infection, but these data are not of a high quality.
although improvements in speech impairments were noted in these studies, due to the small number of patients examined, methodological flaws, and the possibility of publication bias, there is insufficient evidence to conclusively support or refute the efficacy of slt for speech problems in parkinson's disease. a large well designed placebo-controlled rct is needed to demonstrate slt's effectiveness in parkinson's disease. the trial should conform to consort guidelines. outcome measures with particular relevance to patients with parkinson’s disease should be chosen and patients followed for at least six months to determine the duration of any improvement.
there is no clear evidence that parenteral calcium supplementation impacts the outcome of critically ill patients.
this review showed that health education and peer support interventions can result in some improvements in the number of women beginning to breastfeed. findings from these studies suggest that larger increases are likely to result from needs-based, informal repeat education sessions than more generic, formal antenatal sessions. these findings are based only on studies conducted in the usa, among women on low incomes with varied ethnicity and feeding intention, and this raises some questions regarding generalisability to other settings.
the existing trials are insufficient to establish any effect of hormonal contraception on milk quality and quantity. at least one properly conducted randomized controlled trial of adequate size is needed to address hormonal contraceptive use for lactating women.
in spite of methodological problems, it would appear that some people benefit from implants which provide continuous nerve stimulation. more research is needed on the best way to improve patient selection, carry out the implant, and to find why so many fail. the effectiveness of implants should be tested against other interventions, particularly in people with an overactive bladder.
limited available data indicated that single dose dipyrone was of similar efficacy to other analgesics used in renal colic pain, although intramuscular dipyrone was less effective than diclofenac 75 mg. combining dipyrone with antispasmolytic agents did not appear to improve its efficacy. intravenous dipyrone was more effective than intramuscular dipyrone. dry mouth and somnolence were commonly reported with intravenous dipyrone. none of the studies reported agranulocytosis.
there is limited evidence to evaluate second-line therapies in patients with hiv who fail first-line treatment with a who-recommended regimen. one randomised trial in 136 patients and two observational studies (both of low quality) suggest no difference in virological suppression whether or not lamivudine is maintained in a second-line regimen. while outcomes of second-line regimens with boosted pis are favourable in general, there are no studies comparing boosted pis directly in populations starting second-line regimens. current recommendations are based on available resources and patient- and public-health-level considerations.
while oral steroids, especially when used in combination with an oral antibiotic, lead to a quicker resolution of ome in the short term, there is no evidence of longer-term benefit and no evidence that they relieve symptoms of hearing loss. we found no evidence of benefit from treatment of ome with topical intranasal steroids, alone or in combination with an antibiotic, either at short or longer-term follow up.
there was no evidence from the seven trials that plastic adhesive drapes reduce surgical site infection rates, and some evidence that they increase infection rates. further trials may be justified, using blinded outcome assessment to examine the effect of adhesive drapes on surgical site infection, based on different wound classifications.
the studies reviewed were of poor quality and used older antibiotics. this review suggests a beneficial effect of antibiotics in preventing complications such as pneumonia, purulent otitis media and tonsillitis in children with measles. on the basis of this review, it is not possible to recommend definitive guidelines on the type of antibiotic, duration or the day of initiation. use of penicillin or co-trimoxazole may be considered. there is a need for more evidence from high-quality rcts to answer these questions.
the quality of the evidence was very low. three small rcts, of interferon beta-1a, brain-derived neurotrophic factor and cerebrospinal fluid filtration, showed no significant benefit or harm. a fourth small trial showed that the chinese herbal medicine tripterygium polyglycoside hastened recovery significantly more than corticosteroids but this result needs confirmation. it was not possible to draw useful conclusions from the few observational studies.
there is no evidence that single session individual psychological debriefing is a useful treatment for the prevention of post traumatic stress disorder after traumatic incidents. compulsory debriefing of victims of trauma should cease. a more appropriate response could involve a 'screen and treat' model (nice 2005).
although the administration of intravenous fluids compared with oral intake alone demonstrated a reduction in the duration of labour, this finding emerged from only two trials. the findings of other trials suggest that if a policy of no oral intake is applied, then the duration of labour in nulliparous women may be shortened by the administration of intravenous fluids at a rate of 250 ml/hour rather than 125 ml/hour. however, it may be possible for women to simply increase their oral intake rather than being attached to a drip and we have to consider whether it is justifiable to persist with a policy of 'nil by mouth'. one trial raised concerns about the safety of dextrose and this needs further exploration. none of the trials reported on the evaluation of maternal views of being attached to a drip during their entire labour. furthermore, there was no objective assessment of dehydration. the evidence from this review does not provide robust evidence to recommend routine administration of intravenous fluids. interpreting the results from trials was hampered by the low number of trials contributing data and by variation between trials. in trials where oral fluids were not restricted there was considerable variation in the amount of oral fluid consumed by women in different arms of the same trial, and between different trials. in addition, results from trials were not consistent and risk of bias varied. some important research questions were addressed by single trials only, and important outcomes relating to maternal and infant morbidity were frequently not reported.
this review provides evidence that there is a small significant difference in live birth rates in favour of blastocyst transfer (day 5 to 6) compared to cleavage stage transfer (day 2 to 3). however, cumulative clinical pregnancy rates from cleavage stage (derived from fresh and thaw cycles) resulted in higher clinical pregnancy rates than from blastocyst cycles. the most likely explanation for this is the higher rates of frozen embryos and lower failure to transfer rates per couple obtained from cleavage stage protocols. future rcts should report miscarriage, live birth and cumulative live birth rates to enable art consumers and service providers to make well informed decisions on the best treatment option available.
a daily dose of nitrofurantoin and close surveillance has not been shown to prevent ruti compared with close surveillance alone. a significant reduction of asb was found in women with a high clinic attendance rate and who received nitrofurantoin and close surveillance. there was limited reporting of both primary and secondary outcomes for both women and infants. no conclusions can be drawn regarding the optimal intervention to prevent ruti in women who are pregnant. randomised controlled trials comparing different pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions are necessary to investigate potentially effective interventions to prevent ruti in women who are pregnant.
this review provides encouraging evidence that antenatal nutritional advice with the aim of increasing energy and protein intake in the general obstetric population appears to be effective in reducing the risk of preterm birth, increasing head circumference at birth and increasing protein intake, there was no evidence of benefit or adverse effect for any other outcome reported. balanced energy and protein supplementation seems to improve fetal growth, and may reduce the risk of stillbirth and infants born small-for-gestational age. high-protein supplementation does not seem to be beneficial and may be harmful to the fetus. balanced-protein supplementation alone had no significant effects on perinatal outcomes. the results of this review should be interpreted with caution, the risk of bias was either unclear or high for at least one category examined in several of the included trials and the quality of the evidence was low for several important outcomes. also the anthropometric characteristics of the general obstetric population is changing, therefore, those developing interventions aimed at altering energy and protein intake should ensure that only those women likely to benefit are included. large, well designed randomised trials are needed to assess the effects of increasing energy and protein intake during pregnancy in women whose intake is below recommended levels.
current evidence supports the use of cba in patients with severe acute asthma who present to the emergency department to increase their pulmonary functions and reduce hospitalisation. moreover, cba treatment appears to be safe and well tolerated in patients who receive it.
there is insufficient research to know whether routinely providing free food or energy supplements results in better tuberculosis treatment outcomes, or improved quality of life. further trials, particularly from food insecure settings, should have adequate sample sizes to identify, or exclude, clinically important benefits. although blood levels of some vitamins may be low in patients starting treatment for active tuberculosis, there is currently no reliable evidence that routinely supplementing at or above recommended daily amounts has clinical benefits.
there is insufficient evidence available to guide the management of fatigue after stroke. further trials are required.
a single trial has shown a beneficial effect from the use of cotrimoxazole prophylaxis in hiv infected children in zambia. it must be decided whether this can be extrapolated to other resource-poor settings.
patients with ic should receive secondary prevention for cardiovascular disease. cilostazol has been shown to be of benefit in improving walking distance in people with ic. there are no data on whether it results in a reduction of adverse cardiovascular events.
the additional studies tripled participant numbers providing data for analysis, and new, more stringent criteria for outcomes and analysis were used; conclusions about lamotrigine's lack of efficacy in chronic pain did not change. given availability of more effective treatments including antiepileptics and antidepressant medicines, lamotrigine does not have a significant place in therapy based on available evidence.
we identified three studies that investigated the merits of bont for lbp, but only one had a low risk of bias and evaluated patients with non-specific lbp (n = 31). further research is very likely to have an important impact on the estimate of effect and our confidence in it. future trials should standardize patient populations, treatment protocols and comparison groups, enlist more participants and include long-term outcomes, cost-benefit analysis and clinical relevance of findings.
there is not enough evidence to support any benefit of mtx in the treatment of as. high-quality rcts of larger sample sizes are needed to clarify the effect(s) of mtx on as.
opiates compared to supportive care may reduce time to regain birth weight and duration of supportive care but increase duration of hospital stay. when compared to phenobarbitone, opiates may reduce the incidence of seizures but there is no evidence of effect on treatment failure. one study reported a reduction in duration of treatment and nursery admission for infants on morphine. compared to diazepam, opiates reduce the incidence of treatment failure. a post-hoc analysis generates the hypothesis that initial opiate treatment may be restricted to infants of mothers who used opiates only. in view of the methodologic limitations of the included studies the conclusions of this review should be treated with caution.
the trials evaluating us for venous leg ulcers are small, poor-quality and heterogeneous. there is no reliable evidence that us hastens healing of venous ulcers. there is a small amount of weak evidence of increased healing with us, but this requires confirmation in larger, high-quality rcts. there is no evidence of a benefit associated with low frequency us.
the available evidence from the randomized trials is insufficient to advise on any specific conservative modality for treating exercise-related groin pain. while still low quality, the best evidence is from one trial which found that exercise therapy (strengthening of hip and abdominal muscles) in athletes improves short-term outcomes (based primarily on pain measures) and return to sports compared with physiotherapy consisting of passive modalities. given the low quality of the available evidence from both included trials, further randomized trials are necessary to reinforce their findings.
protein supplementation of human milk in relatively well preterm infants results in increases in short term weight gain, linear and head growth. urea levels are increased, which may reflect adequate rather than excessive dietary protein intake. further research should be directed towards the evaluation of specific levels of protein intake in preterm infants and the clinical effects of supplementation with protein, including long term growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes. this may best be done in the context of refinement of available multicomponent fortifier preparations.
whilst four suitable randomized controlled trials looking at reminiscence therapy for dementia were found, several were very small studies, or were of relatively low quality, and each examined different types of reminiscence work. although there are a number of promising indications, in view of the limited number and quality of studies, the variation in types of reminiscence work reported and the variation in results between studies, the review highlights the urgent need for more and better designed trials so that more robust conclusions may be drawn.
there was no evidence that rutosides were superior to the use of placebo or ecs. overall, there is currently limited evidence that 'venoactive' or 'phlebotonic' remedies such as rutosides reduce symptoms of pts. mild side effects were noted in one study. the three studies included in this review provide no evidence for the use of rutosides in the treatment of pts.
although general dentists perform dental extractions because of severe dental caries or periodontal infection, there were no trials identified which evaluated the role of antibiotic prophylaxis in this group of patients in this setting. all of the trials included in this review included healthy patients undergoing extraction of impacted third molars, often performed by oral surgeons. there is evidence that prophylactic antibiotics reduce the risk of infection, dry socket and pain following third molar extraction and result in an increase in mild and transient adverse effects. it is unclear whether the evidence in this review is generalisable to those with concomitant illnesses or immunodeficiency, or those undergoing the extraction of teeth due to severe caries or periodontitis. however, patients at a higher risk of infection are more likely to benefit from prophylactic antibiotics, because infections in this group are likely to be more frequent, associated with complications and be more difficult to treat. due to the increasing prevalence of bacteria which are resistant to treatment by currently available antibiotics, clinicians should consider carefully whether treating 12 healthy patients with antibiotics to prevent one infection is likely to do more harm than good.
there are insufficient data to draw any conclusions for dfo and deferiprone. there are nonsignificant trends towards fewer seizures but overall harm (death) with dfo, and results from one small trial of deferiprone suggest shorter coma recovery and parasite clearance. 2008: we do not plan to update this review given the paucity of recent trials in this area and other priorities in malaria treatment research.
this review provides evidence from seven rcts that phacoemulsification gives a better outcome than ecce with sutures. we also found evidence that ecce with a posterior chamber lens implant provides better visual outcome than icce with aphakic glasses. the long term effect of posterior capsular opacification (pco) needs to be assessed in larger populations. the data also suggests that icce with an anterior chamber lens implant is an effective alternative to icce with aphakic glasses, with similar safety. phacoemulsification provides the best visual outcomes but will only be accessible to the poorer countries if the cost of phacoemulsification and foldable iols decrease. manual small incision cataract surgery provides early visual rehabilitation and comparable visual outcome to phaco. it has better visual outcomes than ecce and can be used in any clinic that is currently carrying out ecce with iol. further research from developing regions are needed to compare the cost and longer term outcomes of these procedures e.g. pco and corneal endothelial cell damage.
somatostatin analogues may reduce perioperative complications but do not reduce perioperative mortality. further adequately powered trials with low risk of bias are necessary. based on the current available evidence, somatostatin and its analogues are recommended for routine use in people undergoing pancreatic resection.
rt was compared to the more intensive crt in the treatment of t3-4, node positive (locally advanced) rectal cancer. while there was no difference in overall survival between rt and crt, crt was associated with less local recurrence.
there is no evidence on the effectiveness and safety of antidepressants in treating depression and other symptoms in women with pcos.
there is a paucity in studies on the efficacy and safety of aspirin and heparin in women with a history of at least two miscarriages without apparent causes other than inherited thrombophilia. the two reviewed trials studied different treatments and only one study was placebo-controlled. neither of the studies showed a benefit of one treatment over the other. therefore, the use of anticoagulants in this setting is not recommended. however, large randomised placebo-controlled trials are still urgently needed.
there is limited evidence from individual trials to suggest that parenteral nutrition is more effective than enteral nutrition in well-nourished children and young people with cancer undergoing chemotherapy. the evidence for other methods of nutritional support remains unclear. no studies were identified comparing the nutritional content in the pn or en groups of studies. further research, incorporating larger sample sizes and rigorous methodology utilising valid and reliable outcome measures, is essential.
there is currently no evidence that nicotine vaccines enhance long-term smoking cessation. rates of serious adverse events recorded in the two trials with full data available were low, and the majority of adverse events reported were at mild to moderate levels. the evidence available suggests nicotine vaccines do not induce compensatory smoking or affect withdrawal symptoms. no nicotine vaccines are currently licensed for use in any country but a number are under development. further trials of nicotine vaccines are needed, comparing vaccines with placebo for smoking cessation. further trials are also needed to explore the potential of nicotine vaccines to prevent relapse. results from past, current and future research should be reported in full. adverse events and serious adverse events should continue to be carefully monitored and thoroughly reported.
current evidence is limited for acute sinusitis confirmed by radiology or nasal endoscopy, but supports the use of incs as a monotherapy or as an adjuvant therapy to antibiotics. clinicians should weigh the modest but clinically important benefits against possible minor adverse events when prescribing therapy.
supported by more than half a century of research, the benefits of fluoride toothpastes are firmly established. taken together, the trials are of relatively high quality, and provide clear evidence that fluoride toothpastes are efficacious in preventing caries.
decreasing retinal ambient light exposure in premature infants is very unlikely to reduce the incidence of rop.
there is not enough evidence to make a definitive conclusion about the use of anticoagulant drugs (with or without mechanical devices) for dvt prophylaxis in patients undergoing abdominal aortic surgery.
although there were significant quality issues with the available evidence, the use of a tourniquet would appear to reduce blood loss during surgery. there were no reported differences between the use or non-use of a tourniquet in terms of complications and morbidity. however, the available trials were not of sufficient size to detect rarer complications such as nerve damage.
there is no firm evidence of efficacy of any medicinal herbs for hcv infection. medicinal herbs for hcv infection should not be used outside randomised clinical trials.
early ultrasound improves the early detection of multiple pregnancies and improved gestational dating may result in fewer inductions for post maturity. caution needs to be exercised in interpreting the results of aspects of this review in view of the fact that there is considerable variability in both the timing and the number of scans women received.
there is some evidence to suggest that mdac and anti-digoxin fab antitoxin may be effective treatments for yellow oleander poisoning. however, the efficacy and indications of these interventions for the treatment of acute digitalis poisoning is uncertain due to the lack of good quality controlled clinical trials. given pharmacokinetic differences between individual cardenolides, the effect of antidotes administered to patients with yellow oleander poisoning cannot be readily translated to those of other cardenolides. unfortunately cost limits the use of antidotes such as anti-digoxin fab antitoxin in developing countries where cardenolide poisonings are frequent. more research is required using relatively cheap antidotes which may also be effective.
the effects of hospital care and the length of stay is important for mental health policy. we found limited data, although outcomes do suggest that a planned short stay policy does not encourage a 'revolving door' pattern of admission and disjointed care for people with serious mental illness. more large, well-designed and reported trials are justified.
statins significantly reduced hyperlipidaemia and tended to reduce cardiovascular events in kidney transplant recipients, but no effect has yet been demonstrated for mortality outcomes. most of the data was derived from one large long-term study. considering the significant impact of statins on all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in the general and predialysis populations, more studies are needed in kidney transplant patients.
the delivery of fa has been incorporated within wide ranging multi-component programmes and study designs have varied according to setting - i.e. family care, care homes and hospital, with surprisingly few studies located in care homes. our findings suggest potential beneficial effects of multi-component interventions, which utilise fa. whilst functional analysis for challenging behaviour in dementia care shows promise, it is too early to draw conclusions about its efficacy.
a 2-4 day course of oral antibiotics appears to be as effective as 7-14 days in eradicating lower tract uti in children.
there is no evidence that the use of quantitative cultures of respiratory secretions results in reduced mortality, reduced time in icu and on mechanical ventilation, or higher rates of antibiotic change when compared to qualitative cultures in patients with vap. similar results were observed when invasive strategies were compared with non-invasive strategies.
the advantages of laparoscopy in women with nonspecific abdominal pain and suspected appendicitis include a higher rate of specific diagnoses being made and a lower rate of removal of normal appendices compared to open appendicectomy only. hospital stays were shorter. there was no evidence of an increase in adverse events with any of the strategies.
bile acids lead to a significant improvement in serum transaminase activities in hepatitis b and c but have no effects on the clearance of virus. there is insufficient evidence either to support or to refute effects on long-term outcomes including hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatic decompensation, and liver related mortality. randomised trials with high methodological quality are required before clinical use is considered.
the updated review corroborates the earlier findings that valproate preparations are ineffective in treating agitation among demented patients, and that valproate therapy is associated with an unacceptable rate of adverse effects. more research on the use of valproate preparations for agitation of people with dementia is needed. on the basis of current evidence, valproate therapy cannot be recommended for management of agitation in dementia.
there is no evidence to suggest that mast/pasg application reduces mortality, length of hospitalisation or length of icu stay in trauma patients and it is possible that it may increase these. these data do not support the continued use of mast/pasg in the situation described. however, it should be recognised that, due to the poor quality of the trials, conclusions should be drawn with caution.
the mirena lng-ius appears to prevent the development of benign endometrial polyps in breast cancer patients taking tamoxifen, over a one-year period. there is no clear evidence from the available randomised controlled trials that lng-ius prevents endometrial hyperplasia or adenocarcinoma in these patients. larger studies are necessary to assess the effects of lng-ius in preventing endometrial hyperplasia and endometrial cancer, and to determine whether lng-ius might have an impact on the risk of breast cancer recurrence.
there is not enough evidence to evaluate the use of piracetam for fetal distress in labour.
small-incision and open cholecystectomy seem to be equivalent regarding risks of complications, but the latter method is associated with a significantly longer hospital stay. the quicker recovery of small-incision cholecystectomy compared with open cholecystectomy confirms the existing preference of this technique over open cholecystectomy.
none of the interventions seem to decrease peri-operative morbidity or offer any long-term survival benefit. aprotinin and tranexamic acid show promise in the reduction of blood transfusion requirements in liver resection surgery. however, there is a high risk of type i (erroneously concluding that an intervention is beneficial when it is actually not beneficial) and type ii errors (erroneously concluding that an intervention is not beneficial when it is actually beneficial) because of the few trials included, the small sample size in each trial, and the high risk of bias. further randomised clinical trials with low risk of bias and random errors assessing clinically important outcomes such as peri-operative mortality are necessary to assess any pharmacological interventions aimed at decreasing blood loss and blood transfusion requirements in liver resections. trials need to be designed to assess the effect of a combination of different interventions in liver resections.
adjunctive estrogen with or without progesterone does not appear to offer convincing advantages over placebo. before any more research is undertaken in this area, all completed and unpublished work should be made available in order to ensure that more trials are justified.
there is no evidence that biofeedback training adds any benefit to conventional treatment in the management of functional faecal incontinence in children. there was not enough evidence on which to assess the effects of biofeedback for the management of organic faecal incontinence. there is some evidence that behavioural interventions plus laxative therapy, rather than laxative therapy alone, improves continence in children with functional faecal incontinence associated with constipation.
the present systematic review confirms the long-term efficacy of eh, at least for grade iii haemorrhoids, compared to the less invasive technique of rbl but at the expense of increased pain, higher complications and more time off work. however, despite these disadvantages of eh, patient satisfaction and patient's acceptance of the treatment modalities seems to be similar following both the techniques implying patient's preference for complete long-term cure of symptoms and possibly less concern for minor complications. so, rbl can be adopted as the choice of treatment for grade ii haemorrhoids with similar results but with out the side effects of eh while reserving eh for grade iii haemorrhoids or recurrence after rbl. more robust study is required to make definitive conclusions. one additional study was identified from the updated search (ali 2005). however, after careful review and discussion among the authors, it was decided that this study did not meet the necessary criteria for including in the analysis. hence, the results and conclusion remains the same.
treatment of h. pylori infection is more effective than antisecretory non-eradication therapy (with or without long-term maintenance antisecretory therapy) in preventing recurrent bleeding from peptic ulcer. all patients with peptic ulcer bleeding should be tested for h. pylori infection, and eradication therapy should be prescribed to h. pylori-positive patients.
the bulk of the evidence in this review derives from one large multi-centre but inadequately reported trial conducted over 15 years ago. this found no significant differences between surgical or conservative treatment in functional ability and health related quality of life at three years after displaced intra-articular calcaneal fracture. though it reported a greater risk of major complications after surgery, subtalar arthrodeses for the development of subtalar arthritis was significantly greater after conservative treatment. overall, there is insufficient high quality evidence relating to current practice to establish whether surgical or conservative treatment is better for adults with displaced intra-articular calcaneal fracture. evidence from adequately powered randomised, multi-centre controlled trials, assessing patient-centred and clinically relevant outcomes is required. however, it would be prudent to reassess this need after an update of the review that incorporates new evidence from a currently ongoing multi-centre trial.
currently, there is no evidence for the superiority or equivalence of azithromycin monotherapy or combination therapy for the treatment of p. falciparum or p. vivax compared with other antimalarials or with the current first-line antimalarial combinations. the available evidence suggests that azithromycin is a weak antimalarial with some appealing safety characteristics. unless the ongoing dose, formulation and product optimisation process results in a universally efficacious product, or a specific niche application is identified that is complementary to the current scala of more efficacious antimalarial combinations, azithromycin's future for the treatment of malaria does not look promising.
there is insufficient evidence to support the routine practice of hydrotubation or second-look laparoscopy following female pelvic reproductive surgery. the studies on which this conclusion is based were either of poor quality or underpowered. these interventions should be performed in the context of a good quality, adequately powered randomised controlled trial. postoperative hydrotubation with fluid containing antibiotic may offer benefit over hydrotubation fluid without antibiotic following tubal surgery. a randomised controlled trial of postoperative hydrotubation with antibiotic-containing fluid versus no hydrotubation for improving fertility following tubal surgery is justified.
single dose codeine 60 mg provides good analgesia to few individuals, and does not compare favourably with commonly used alternatives such as paracetamol, nsaids and their combinations with codeine, especially after dental surgery; the large difference between dental and other surgery was unexpected. higher doses were not evaluated.
a short course of corticosteroids following assessment for an asthma exacerbation significantly reduces the number of relapses to additional care, hospitalizations and use of short-acting beta2-agonist without an apparent increase in side effects. intramuscular and oral corticosteroids are both effective.
for acute pouchitis, ciprofloxacin was more effective than metronidazole, while budesonide enemas and metronidazole were similarly effective. for chronic pouchitis, vsl#3 was more effective than placebo. for the prevention of pouchitis, vsl#3 was more effective than placebo. larger rcts are needed to determine the optimal agent(s) for the treatment and prevention of pouchitis.
there is currently no evidence to recommend or refute the use of piggy-back method of liver transplantation.
the number, size and reporting of randomised controlled perazine trials is insufficient to present firm conclusions about the properties of this antipsychotic. it is possible that perazine is associated with a similar risk of extrapyramidal side-effects as some atypical antipsychotics, and this should be clarified in larger, well-designed trials. [note: the four citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
riluzole 100 mg daily is reasonably safe and probably prolongs median survival by about two to three months in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
endoscopic metal stents are the intervention of choice at present in patients with malignant distal obstructive jaundice due to pancreatic carcinoma. in patients with short predicted survival, their patency benefits over plastic stents may not be realised. further rcts are needed to determine the optimal stent type for these patients.
since the last version of this review in issue 2, 2007 no new studies have been found and the results therefore remain the same. there is still insufficient evidence to recommend topical lidocaine as a first-line agent in the treatment of postherpetic neuralgia with allodynia. further research should be undertaken on the efficacy of topical lidocaine for other chronic neuropathic pain disorders, and also to compare different classes of drugs (e.g. topical anaesthetic applications versus anti-epileptic drugs).
the use of amnioinfusion for potential or suspected umbilical cord compression may be of considerable benefit to mother and baby by reducing the occurrence of variable fhr decelerations, improving short-term measures of neonatal outcome, reducing maternal postpartum endometritis and lowering the use of caesarean section, although there were methodological limitations to the trials reviewed here. in addition, the trials are too small to address the possibility of rare but serious maternal adverse effects of amnioinfusion. more research is needed to confirm the findings, assess longer-term measures of fetal outcome, and to assess the impact on caesarean section rates when the diagnosis of fetal distress is more stringent. trials should assess amnioinfusion in specific clinical situations, such as fhr decelerations, oligohydramnios or prelabour rupture of membranes.
due to the sub-optimal quality of the trials and statistically non-significant results, it is not possible to draw any conclusions for treatment. this review highlights the paucity of data in this area. as such, there is a need for scientifically rigorous research trials to evaluate the role of pharmacological interventions for anxiety disorders in patients with copd, using a sample size large enough to demonstrate meaningful clinical significance.
there were no adverse effects of hvhf reported.there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of hvhf in critically ill patients with severe sepsis and or septic shock except as interventions being investigated in the setting of a randomized clinical trial. these trials should be large, multi-centred and have clinically relevant outcome measures. financial implications should also be assessed.
there is insufficient evidence to draw reliable conclusions about the effects of diuretics on prevention of pre-eclampsia and its complications. however, from this review, no clear benefits have been found from the use of diuretics to prevent pre-eclampsia. taken together with the level of adverse effects found, the use of diuretics for the prevention of pre-eclampsia and its complications cannot be recommended.
m. pneumoniae cannot be reliably diagnosed in children and adolescents with community-acquired pneumonia based on clinical symptoms and signs. although the absence of wheeze is a statistically significant diagnostic indicator, it does not have sufficient diagnostic value to guide empirical macrolide treatment. data from two studies suggest that the presence of chest pain more than doubles the probability of m. pneumoniae. however, further research is needed to substantiate this finding. more high quality large-scale studies in primary care settings are needed to help develop prediction rules based on epidemiological data as well as clinical and baseline patient characteristics.
home- or community-based interventions which provide antimalarial drugs free of charge probably improve prompt access to antimalarials, and there is moderate quality evidence from rural ethiopia that they may impact on childhood mortality when implemented in appropriate settings. programmes which treat all fevers presumptively with antimalarials lead to overuse antimalarials, and potentially undertreat other causes of fever such as pneumonia. incorporating rdt diagnosis into home- or community-based programmes for malaria may help to reduce this overuse of antimalarials, and has been shown to be safe under trial conditions.
nsaids are somewhat effective in relieving discomfort caused by a cold but there is no clear evidence of their effect in easing respiratory symptoms. the balance of benefit and harms needs to be considered when using nsaids for colds.
there is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of black cohosh for menopausal symptoms. however, there is adequate justification for conducting further studies in this area. the uncertain quality of identified trials highlights the need for improved reporting of study methods, particularly with regards to allocation concealment and the handling of incomplete outcome data. the effect of black cohosh on other important outcomes, such as health-related quality of life, sexuality, bone health, night sweats and cost-effectiveness also warrants further investigation.
the administration of topical proparacaine 30 seconds prior to the ophthalmological evaluation was associated with a reduction in pain scores especially at the time of speculum insertion. however, despite treatment, screening remains a painful procedure and the role of nonpharmacological and pharmacological intervention including different local anaesthetic agents should be ascertained in future randomised trials.
there are insufficient data available to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the routine use of naloxone for newborn infants of greater than 34 weeks' gestation with suspected perinatal asphyxia. a further randomised controlled trial is needed to determine if naloxone benefits newborn infants with suspected perinatal asphyxia. such a trial should assess clinically important outcomes such as mortality, and adverse short and long term neurological outcomes.
there is insufficient evidence to confirm or refute the effectiveness of antibiotic therapy for the treatment of lactational mastitis. there is an urgent need to conduct high-quality, double-blinded rcts to determine whether antibiotics should be used in this common postpartum condition.
there is evidence of a significant reduction in mortality from aaa in men aged 65 to 79 years who undergo ultrasound screening. there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate benefit in women. the cost effectiveness may be acceptable, but needs further expert analysis. these findings need careful consideration in judging whether a co-ordinated population-based screening programme should be introduced.
prophylaxis with fluconazole or ketoconazole in critically ill patients reduces invasive fungal infections by one half and total mortality by one quarter. although no significant increase in azole-resistant candida species associated with prophylaxis was demonstrated, trials were not powered to exclude such an effect. in patients at increased risk of invasive fungal infections, antifungal prophylaxis with fluconazole should be considered.
available evidence does not support the use of oral betamimetics for maintenance therapy after threatened preterm labour.
radiant warmers result in increased iwl compared to incubators. this needs to be taken into account when calculating daily fluid requirements. the results of this review do not provide sufficient evidence concerning effects on important outcomes to guide clinical practice. further randomised controlled trials are required to assess the effects of radiant warmers versus incubators in neonatal care on important short and long term outcomes, with particular attention to extremely low birthweight infants in the early neonatal period.
recombinant human growth hormone (hgh) doses between 0.3 to 0.375 mg/kg/wk increase short-term growth in girls with turner syndrome by approximately three (two) cm in the first (second) year of treatment. treatment in one trial increased final height by approximately six cm over an untreated control group. despite this increase, the final height of treated women was still outside the normal range. additional trials of the effects of hgh carried out with control groups until final height is achieved would allow better informed decisions about whether the benefits of hgh treatment outweigh the requirement of treatment over several years at considerable cost.
based on only three small trials, sublingual misoprostol appears to be at least as effective as when the same dose is administered orally. there are inadequate data to comment on the relative complications and side-effects. sublingual or buccal misoprostol should not enter clinical use until its safety and optimal dosage have been established by larger trials. [note: the 17 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
this systematic review indicates that music listening may have a beneficial effect on preoperative anxiety. these findings are consistent with the findings of three other cochrane systematic reviews on the use of music interventions for anxiety reduction in medical patients. therefore, we conclude that music interventions may provide a viable alternative to sedatives and anti-anxiety drugs for reducing preoperative anxiety.
despite major public health importance, trypanocidal·therapy for chronic asymptomatic t. cruzi infection has been tested in few, small size rcts which were designed to assess parasitic-related, but not clinical outcomes. therefore, the potential of trypanocidal therapy to prevent chagas' disease among asymptomatic, chronically infected subjects is promising, but remains to be evaluated. trypanocidal therapy, particularly nitroimidazolic derivatives given to children or adults with positive xenodiagnosis improve parasite-related outcomes. the large contrast between the burden of chagas disease and the existing evidence on its prevention points the need to test these or newer agents in more and larger rcts that include clinical endpoints.
published literature strongly supports the use of water-soluble contrast as a predictive test for non-operative resolution of adhesive small bowel obstruction. although gastrografin does not cause resolution of small bowel obstruction there is strong evidence that it reduces hospital stay in those not requiring surgery.
wf and iff are probably effective in reducing alcohol misuse. no direct comparisons of wf against iff were found, but wf impacted across a broader set of outcomes and is less costly so therefore might be preferred. significant effects were more apparent for short-term outcomes (up to three months). for mailed and group feedback, and social norms marketing campaigns, the results are on the whole not significant and therefore cannot be recommended.
although the findings of this review were generally positive, no statistical significance was reached. we conclude that at present there is insufficient evidence for the effectiveness of most of the interventions used in the primary prevention of oihd. this does not mean that current measures are necessarily ineffective, as the limited studies to date have been rather small and of poor quality. larger well designed rcts are now needed in different workplaces to establish the effectiveness of various preventative strategies.
there is no evidence for protection by spf66 vaccines against p. falciparum in africa. there is a modest reduction in attacks of p. falciparum malaria following vaccination with spf66 in south america. there is no justification for further trials of spf66 in its current formulation. further research with spf66 vaccines in south america or with new formulations of spf66 may be justified.
the largest included study that met our inclusion criteria suggested that dcp was effective in the prevention of episodic weakness in both hypokalemic and hyperkalemic periodic paralyses. the other two studies provide some evidence that either acetazolamide or pinacidil may improve muscle strength. however we still lack sufficient evidence to provide full guidelines for the treatment of people with periodic paralysis.
evidence of any efficacy of vitamin b12 in improving the cognitive function of people with dementia and low serum b12 levels is insufficient. the included trials (de la fourniere 1997; hvas 2004; seal 2002) were restricted to a small number of patients with alzheimer's disease and other types of cognitive impairment. no trials involving people without dementia or using other definitions of vitamin b12 deficiency were found.
the timing and dose intensity of cisplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy appears to have an important impact on whether or not it benefits women with locally advanced cervical cancer and warrants further exploration. obtaining additional ipd may improve the strength of these conclusions.
the trials included in this review confirm the clinical observation that laser photocoagulation of drusen leads to their disappearance. however, there is no evidence that this subsequently results in a reduction in the risk of developing cnv, geographic atrophy or visual acuity loss.
this review currently does not provide convincing evidence that radiotherapy is an effective treatment for neovascular amd. if further trials are to be considered to evaluate radiotherapy in amd then adequate masking of the control group must be considered.
this systematic review revealed no evidence to support the use of early br/ld combination therapy as a strategy to prevent or delay the onset of motor complications in the treatment of pd.
there is insufficient randomised evidence to be confident of a difference between ghb and placebo, or to determine reliably if ghb is more or less effective than other drugs for the treatment of alcohol withdrawl or the prevention of relapses. the small amount of randomised evidence available suggests that ghb 50mg may be more effective than placebo in the treatment of aws, and in preventing relapses and craving in previously detoxified alcoholics during the first 3 months of follow-up. this review does not provide evidence in favour or against ghb compared to benzodiazepines and clomethiazole for treatment of aws; but, again based on a small amount of randomised evidence, ghb appears better than ntx and disulfiram in maintaining abstinence and preventing craving in the medium term (3 to 12 months). the review does not provide evidence of a difference in side effects between ghb and benzodiazepines, ntx or disulfiram. these findings should be considered alongside concerns that have been raised about ghb regarding the risk of developing addiction, and the misuse or abuse of the drug, suggesting to use ghb only under strict medical surveillance.
currently, there is insufficient evidence for the efficacy of primary school-based behavioural interventions for reducing caries. there is limited evidence for the effectiveness of these interventions on plaque outcomes and on children's oral health knowledge acquisition. none of the included interventions were reported as being based on or derived from behavioural theory. there is a need for further high quality research to utilise theory in the design and evaluation of interventions for changing oral health related behaviours in children and their parents.
there is insufficient and conflicting evidence regarding flavonoid intake and the prevention of colorectal neoplasms. it is difficult to determine flavonoid intake. therefore, more evidence is needed to clarify the association between flavonoids and colorectal neoplasms.
evidence for the efficacy of psychological therapies in sickle cell disease is currently limited. this systematic review has clearly identified the need for well-designed, adequately-powered, multicentre randomised controlled trials assessing the effectiveness of specific interventions in sickle cell disease.
the comparative efficacy of fertility awareness-based methods of contraception remains unknown. despite intensive training and ongoing support, most participants in these trials discontinued prematurely. contraceptive methods should be properly evaluated, preferably in randomized controlled trials, before adoption and dissemination.
the limited evidence currently available does not support the use of calcitonin to control pain from bone metastases. since the last version of this review, none of the new relevant studies have provided additional information on this treatment, in contrast to other therapeutic approaches that should be considered.
differences in the odds of cure did not reach statistical significance when azithromycin was compared with benzathine penicillin for the treatment of early syphilis. no definitive conclusion can be made regarding the relative safety of benzathine penicillin g and azithromycin for early syphilis. further studies on the utility of benzathine penicillin g for early syphilis are warranted.
this meta-analysis demonstrated a clinically and statistically significant prevention of bone loss at the lumbar spine and forearm with vitamin d and calcium in corticosteroid treated patients. because of low toxicity and cost all patients being started on corticosteroids should receive prophylactic therapy with calcium and vitamin d.
crt seems to be optimal for most early stage (i-ii) hd patients. for advanced stages (iii to iv), crt better prevents progression/relapse but ct alone seems to cause less sm.rt alone gives a higher overall sm risk than crt due to increased need for salvage therapy. reduced sm risk after if-rt instead of ef-rt could not be demonstrated. due to the large number of studies excluded because no ipd were received, to the inclusion of many outdated treatments and to the limited amount of long-term data, one must be cautious in applying these results to current therapies.
azathioprine is an appropriate maintenance treatment for patients with ms who frequently relapse and require steroids. cumulative doses of 600 g should not be exceeded in relation to a possible increased risk of malignancy. considering the trade off between the benefits and harms, azathioprine is a fair alternative to interferon beta for treating ms. a logical next step for future trials would seem the direct comparison of azathioprine and interferon beta. in fact the direct comparison between these two widely used treatments in ms has not been made.
the use of warm compresses on the perineum is associated with a decreased occurrence of perineal trauma. the procedure has shown to be acceptable to women and midwives. this procedure may therefore be offered to women.
caution should be exercised in applying these results to modern neonatal intensive care, because the studies included in this review were conducted prior to the introduction of antenatal steroids, post natal surfactant and the use of synchronised modes of ventilatory support. most of the participants had single pathology (hmd) and no studies examined the effects of it on newborns ventilated for other reasons such as meconium aspiration and congenital heart disease (lungs with normal compliance). however, the increased rates of air leaks and deaths using long its are clinically important; thus, infants with poorly compliant lungs should be ventilated with a short it.
there is insufficient evidence to recommend, or advise against, diabetic pregnant women to enrol in exercise programs. further trials, with larger sample size, involving women with gestational diabetes, and possibly type 1 and 2 diabetes, are needed to evaluate this intervention. [note: the six citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
the role of maintenance therapy with calcium channel blockers for preventing preterm birth is not clear. well designed randomised trials of sufficient size with relevant outcomes are required. [note: the four citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is no evidence from randomized trials to support the use of dopamine to prevent renal dysfunction in indomethacin-treated preterm infants.
there are few relevant trials and, presently, there is little conclusive evidence regarding the effects of antipsychotic medication for those with early onset schizophrenia. some benefits were identified in using the atypical antipsychotic clozapine compared with haloperidol but the benefits were offset by an increased risk of serious adverse effects. larger, more robust, trials are required.
overall, the quality of evidence summarised in this review is not of sufficient quality to change current clinical practice. in the absence of clear evidence, the operators should continue to use methods and technique modifications with which they are most familiar with. any randomised trials of technique modifications that are performed to high standard with adequate safety outcomes and power to detect important clinical differences would be clearly welcome.
bdp appears to demonstrate a shallow dose response effect in long-term asthma for a small number of efficacy outcomes over range of daily doses from 400 mcg/d to 1600 mcg/d, although the clinical significance of the improvements afforded by higher doses is questionable.
ivf may be more effective than iui+so. due to paucity of data from rcts the effectiveness of ivf for unexplained infertility relative to expectant management, clomiphene citrate and iui alone remains unproven. adverse events and the costs associated with these interventions have not been adequately assessed.
the quality of studies evaluating melasma treatments was generally poor and available treatments inadequate. high-quality randomised controlled trials on well-defined participants with long-term outcomes to determine the duration of response are needed.
clonidine, ssris and snris, gabapentin and relaxation therapy showed a mild to moderate effect on reducing hot flushes in women with a history of breast cancer.
the effectiveness of physical conditioning programs in reducing sick leave when compared to usual care or other exercises in workers with back pain remains uncertain. in workers with acute back pain, these programs probably have no effect on sick leave, but there may be a positive effect on sick leave for workers with subacute and chronic back pain. workplace involvement might improve the outcome. better understanding of the mechanism behind physical conditioning programs and return-to-work is needed to be able to develop more effective interventions.
this review was complicated by a lack of generally accepted diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of tos. there was very low quality evidence that transaxillary first rib resection decreased pain more than supraclavicular neuroplasty but no randomized evidence that either is better than no treatment. there is no randomized evidence to support the use of other currently used treatments. there is a need for an agreed definition for the diagnosis of tos, especially the disputed form, agreed outcome measures and high quality randomized trials that compare the outcome of interventions with no treatment and with each other.
conditional cash transfer programmes have been the subject of some well-designed evaluations, which strongly suggest that they could be an effective approach to improving access to preventive services. their replicability under different conditions - particularly in more deprived settings - is still unclear because they depend on effective primary health care and mechanisms to disburse payments. further rigorous evaluative research is needed, particularly where ccts are being introduced in low income countries, for example in sub-saharan africa or south asia.
two studies with a total of 59 mothers suggest modest improvements in short-term ebm volumes when a medication is used after insufficient ebm occurs in mothers following preterm delivery. in both studies, the medication was commenced ≧14 days post delivery and following insufficient ebm supply with other lactation supports. currently, no studies support prophylactic use of a galactagogue medication at any gestation. use of any galactagogue medication has only been examined at more than 14 days post delivery and after full lactation support has been given. further trials should examine larger groups of preterm mothers and consider breastfeeding outcomes over a longer period.
data are lacking about the value of amniotomy alone for induction of labour. while there are now other modern methods available for induction of labour (pharmacological agents), there remain clinical scenarios where amniotomy alone may be desirable and appropriate, and this method is worthy of further research. this research should include evaluation of the appropriate time interval from amniotomy to secondary intervention, women and caregivers' satisfaction and economic analysis. [note: the two citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
current evidence indicates that compared to placebo, antibiotics for msaf in labour may reduce chorioamnionitis. there was no evidence that antibiotics could reduce postpartum endometritis, neonatal sepsis and nicu admission. this systematic review identifies the need for more well-designed, adequately powered rcts to assess the effect of prophylactic antibiotics in the incidence of maternal and neonatal complications.
mupirocin ointment appears effective in reducing the risk of catheter-related bacteraemia. insufficient reporting on mupirocin resistance was noted and needs to be considered in future studies. a lack of high quality data on the routine use of povidone-iodine ointment, polysporin ointment and topical honey warrant larger rcts. insufficient data were available to determine which dressing type (transparent polyurethane or dry gauze dressing) has the lowest risk of catheter-related infections.
the administration of buffered fluids to adult patients during surgery is equally safe and effective as the administration of non-buffered saline-based fluids. the use of buffered fluids is associated with less metabolic derangement, in particular hyperchloraemia and metabolic acidosis. larger studies are needed to assess robust outcomes such as mortality.
our results may indicate that antiplatelet drugs did not significantly change the odds of death but reduce the outcome 'stroke of any cause' in patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy. however, it can not be excluded that the beneficial effect in reducing stroke is due to chance. there is a suggestion that antiplatelets may increase the odds of haemorrhage, but there are currently too few data to quantify this effect.
evidence suggests that water immersion during the first stage of labour reduces the use of epidural/spinal analgesia and duration of the first stage of labour. there is limited information for other outcomes related to water use during the first and second stages of labour, due to intervention and outcome variability. there is no evidence of increased adverse effects to the fetus/neonate or woman from labouring in water or waterbirth. however, the studies are very variable and considerable heterogeneity was detected for some outcomes. further research is needed.
there is limited but consistent evidence showing that postoperative lng-iud use reduces the recurrence of painful periods in women with endometriosis. further well-designed rcts are needed to confirm these findings.
there is not enough evidence to support the use of x-ray pelvimetry in women whose fetuses have a cephalic presentation.
this review suggests that computerized advice for drug dosage has some benefits: it increased the initial dose of drug, increased serum drug concentrations and led to a more rapid therapeutic control. it also reduced the risk of toxic drug levels and the length of time spent in the hospital. however, it had no effect on adverse reactions. in addition, there was no evidence to suggest that some decision support technical features (such as its integration into a computer physician order entry system) or aspects of organization of care (such as the setting) could optimise the effect of computerised advice.
haemostatic drugs cannot be recommended for the treatment of acute spontaneous ich in clinical practice, but a large rct would be justified.
mannitol therapy for raised icp may have a beneficial effect on mortality when compared to pentobarbital treatment, but may have a detrimental effect on mortality when compared to hypertonic saline. icp-directed treatment shows a small beneficial effect compared to treatment directed by neurological signs and physiological indicators. there are insufficient data on the effectiveness of pre-hospital administration of mannitol.
the evidence found in this review shows that some interventions improve the mean use of hearing protection devices compared to non-intervention. future trials should have standard outcomes and interventions to allow the combining of results in meta-analysis.
adult patients treated with csa at an initial dose of 3.5-5 mg/kg/d in two divided doses perhaps in combination with oral prednisolone 0.15 mg/kg/d are more likely to achieve a partial remission of the nephrotic syndrome compared with symptomatic treatment or prednisolone alone. however, there is a probability of deterioration of kidney function due to the nephrotoxic effect of csa in the long term. for csa, a larger controlled trial with longer follow-up should be performed to prove the benefit of this regimen not only on proteinuria but also on the preservation of kidney function. present available data do not support the general use of alkylating substances for the treatment of fsgs in adults.
administration of oxytocin before and after the expulsion of placenta did not have any significant influence on many clinically important outcomes such as the incidence of postpartum haemorrhage, rate of placental retention and the length of the third stage of labour. however, the number of available studies were limited. the only uterotonic drug used was oxytocin, mainly through intravenous infusion, therefore its extrapolation to other routes of administration should be interpreted cautiously. more studies are required to examine other maternal and neonatal outcomes using consistent approaches.
the criteria for conversion to general anaesthesia should be clearly defined in future research. this review found that intrathecal hyperbaric bupivacaine had a more rapid onset of sensory blockade at the t4 level than isobaric bupivacaine. it may also result in less need for conversion to general anaesthesia and supplemental analgesia. however, due to the rarity of this outcome, variability in the dose, use of adjuvant drugs and differences in the technique used for regional anaesthesia the evidence is weak. any apparent advantage of hyperbaric bupivacaine needs to be confirmed in larger randomized trials. there were no differences in the adverse effects studied.
in patients with medium/high risk ta or t1 bladder cancer, immunotherapy with intravesical bcg following tur appears to provide a significant advantage over tur alone in delaying tumour recurrence.
sulpiride plus clozapine is probably more effective than clozapine alone in producing clinical improvement in some people whose illness has been resistant to other antipsychotic drugs including clozapine. however, much more robust data are needed.
this review found favourable outcomes for patients after risk assessment for familial breast cancer. however, there were too few papers to make any significant conclusions about how best to deliver cancer genetic risk-assessment services. further research is needed assessing the best means of delivering cancer risk assessment, by different health professionals, in different ways and in alternative locations.
ics were superior to scg on measures of lung function and asthma control for both adults and children with chronic asthma. there were few studies reporting on quality of life and health care utilization, which limited our ability to adequately evaluate the relative effects of these medications on a broader range of outcomes. although there were no differences in adverse effects between ics and scg, most trials were short and may not have been of sufficient duration to identify long-term effects. our results support recent consensus statements in the u.s. and elsewhere that favour the use of ics over scg for control of persistent asthma.
there is insufficient evidence to support or reject the use of acbt over any other airway clearance therapy. five studies, with five different comparators, found that acbt was comparable to other therapies in outcomes such as patient preference, lung function, sputum weight, oxygen saturation, and number of pulmonary exacerbations. longer-term studies are needed to more adequately assess the effects of acbt on outcomes important for patients such as quality of life and patient preference.
this review found mixed results, therefore evidence of the efficacy of psychostimulants for cocaine dependence is inconclusive. nevertheless promising results exist for methadone maintained dual heroin-cocaine addicts and for some specific drugs such as dexamphetamine and bupropion.
we were unable to identify nutritional interventions for liver transplanted patients that seemed to offer convincing benefits. further randomised clinical trials with low risk of bias and powerful sample sizes are needed.
teicoplanin and vancomycin are both effective in treating those with proven or suspected infection; however the incidence of adverse effects including nephrotoxicity was lower with teicoplanin. there were no cases of aki needing dialysis. it remains unclear whether the differential effect on kidney function should influence which antibiotic be prescribed, although it may be reasonable to consider teicoplanin for patients at higher risk for aki needing dialysis.
it is noteworthy that so few studies met the inclusion criteria. there is some evidence to suggest that the method of payment of primary care physicians affects their behaviour, but the findings' generalisability is unknown. more evaluations of the effect of payment systems on pcp behaviour are needed, especially in terms of the relative impact of salary versus capitation payments.
there was insufficient evidence available from the included trials that compared neuraxial anaesthesia with general anaesthesia to rule out clinically important differences for most clinical outcomes. neuraxial anaesthesia may reduce pneumonia. no conclusions can be drawn with regard to mortality, myocardial infarction and rate of lower-limb amputation, or less common outcomes.
etodolac 200 mg may be a useful analgesic in postoperative pain, with efficacy similar to paracetamol 1000 mg and celecoxib 200 mg. higher doses may provide analgesia equivalent to more commonly used drugs, such as ibuprofen 400 mg, naproxen 500 mg and diclofenac 50 mg.
from the studies included in this review, there is some evidence to show that spironolactone is an effective treatment to decrease the degree of hirsutism but there was no evidence for effectiveness for the treatment of acne vulgaris. studies in this area are scarce and small. individual study data indicates some superiority of spironolactone over other drugs but results cannot be generalised.
the existing evidence from randomised controlled trials is insufficient to determine whether naloxone confers any important benefits to newborn infants with cardiorespiratory or neurological depression that may be due to intrauterine exposure to opiate. given concerns about the safety of naloxone in this context it may be appropriate to limit its use to randomised controlled trials that aim resolve these uncertainties.
there is no evidence for the effectiveness of this multifaceted intervention in improving outcomes for all groups of patients or carers. patients with mild to moderate disability benefit from a reduction in death and disability. patients and carers do report improved satisfaction with some aspects of service provision.
there is no convincing evidence that iron treatment of young children with ida has an effect on psychomotor development or cognitive function within 30 days after commencement of therapy. the effect of longer-term treatment remains unclear. there is an urgent need for further large randomised controlled trials with long-term follow-up.
in view of the methodological limitations and the small number of studies, we have no reliable evidence to support the use of any treatment including hypnosis or paradoxical injunction therapy in the treatment of nes. randomised studies of these and other interventions are needed.
there is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of helium-oxygen mixtures to treat acute exacerbations of copd in either ventilated or non-ventilated patients. suitably designed randomised controlled trials with the endpoint being the avoidance of mechanical ventilation may be justified.
implications for practicedexamethasone reduces the need for endotracheal reintubation of neonates after a period of ippv. in view of the lack of effect in low-risk infants and the documented and potential side effects, it appears reasonable to restrict its use to infants at increased risk for airway edema and obstruction, such as those who have received repeated or prolonged intubations. implications for researchissues of dosage and applicability to the extremely low birthweight population could be addressed in future trials. outcomes such as chronic lung disease, duration of assisted ventilation and length of hospital stay as well as long-term neurodevelopment should also be examined.
the available data were limited and incomplete, and not all pre-specified outcomes could be evaluated. consequently, only tentative conclusions are possible. the available data suggest that anal plugs can be difficult to tolerate. however, if they are tolerated they can be helpful in preventing incontinence. plugs could then be useful in a selected group of people either as a substitute for other forms of management or as an adjuvant treatment option. plugs come in different designs and sizes; the review showed that the selection of the type of plug can impact on its performance.
no benefit of antibiotics in preventing infection of pancreatic necrosis or mortality was found, except for when imipenem (a beta-lactam) was considered on its own, where a significantly decrease in pancreatic infection was found. none of the studies included in this review were adequately powered. further better designed studies are needed if the use of antibiotic prophylaxis is to be recommended.
most tooth extractions are undertaken by dentists for a variety of reasons, however, all but three studies included in the present review included participants undergoing extraction of third molars, most of which were undertaken by oral surgeons. there is some evidence that rinsing with chlorhexidine (0.12% and 0.2%) or placing chlorhexidine gel (0.2%) in the sockets of extracted teeth, provides a benefit in preventing dry socket. there was insufficient evidence to determine the effects of the other 10 preventative interventions each evaluated in single studies. there was insufficient evidence to determine the effects of any of the interventions to treat dry socket. the present review found some evidence for the association of minor adverse reactions with use of 0.12%, 0.2% and 2% chlorhexidine mouthrinses, though most studies were not designed to detect the presence of hypersensitivity reactions to mouthwash as part of the study protocol. no adverse events were reported in relation to the use of 0.2% chlorhexidine gel placed directly into a socket (though previous allergy to chlorhexidine was an exclusion criterion in these trials). in view of recent reports in the uk of two cases of serious adverse events associated with irrigation of dry socket with chlorhexidine mouthrinse, it is recommended that all members of the dental team prescribing chlorhexidine products are aware of the potential for both minor and serious adverse side effects.
considering mortality in early infancy being a major contributory cause of overall child mortality for the under five year old group in developing countries, it is critical to obtain sound scientific evidence of the effect of vitamin a supplementation in neonates. evidence provided in this review does indicate a potential beneficial effect of supplementing neonates with vitamin a at birth for reducing mortality in the first half of infancy. considering the absence of a clear indication of the biological mechanism and conflicting findings from individual studies in settings with varying levels of maternal vitamin a deficiency and infant mortality, and given four additional ongoing trials with approximately 100,000 neonates being enrolled, we propose a delay in any policy recommendations for neonatal vitamin a supplementation.
there is insufficient evidence to confidently judge the effectiveness of sweet-tasting solutions in reducing needle-related pain in infants (one month to 12 months of age). the treatments do, however, appear promising. data from a series of individual trials are promising, as are the results from a subset meta-analysis of studies measuring duration of crying. further well controlled rcts are warranted in this population to determine the optimal concentration, volume, method of administration, and possible adverse effects.
the evidence does not support the use of topical rubefacients containing salicylates for acute injuries, and suggests that in chronic conditions their efficacy compares poorly with topical non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids). topical salicylates seem to be relatively well tolerated in the short-term, based on limited data. there is no evidence at all for topical rubefacients with other components.
there is evidence to support the continued use of amodiaquine to treat uncomplicated malaria, although local drug resistance patterns need to be considered. monitoring for adverse events should continue. this review summarizes trials up to 2003. for the reasons in the 'what's new' section, this review will no longer be updated.
mab produces a modest overall and cancer-specific survival at five years but is associated with increased adverse events and reduced quality of life.
there is substantial evidence that routinely administered case finding/screening questionnaires for depression have minimal impact on the detection, management or outcome of depression by clinicians. practice guidelines and recommendations to adopt this strategy, in isolation, in order to improve the quality of healthcare should be resisted. the longer term benefits and costs of routine screening/case finding for depression have not been evaluated. a two stage procedure for screening/case finding may be effective, but this needs to be evaluated in a large scale cluster randomised trial, with a prospective economic evaluation.
the studies of pericoital lng regimens provided promising results but had a number of serious methodological limitations. a pressing need exits to conduct a rigorous research to confirm the efficacy and safety of pericoital use of lng as a primary means of contraception among women with infrequent intercourse. if the method is shown to be efficacious, safe and acceptable, the results may warrant revision of the current who recommendations and marketing strategies.
no difference exists in the effectiveness of roct, in terms of radiological success, between single- and multiple-visit roct. most short- and long-term complications are also similar in terms of frequency, although patients undergoing a single visit may experience a slightly higher frequency of swelling and are significatively more likely to take painkillers.
the current evidence base does not suggest that alginate dressings are more or less effective in the healing of venous leg ulcers than hydrocolloid or plain non-adherent dressings, and there is no evidence to indicate a difference between different proprietary alginate dressings. however, the rcts in this area are considered to be of low or unclear methodological quality. further, good quality evidence is required from well designed and rigorously conducted rcts that employ - and clearly report on - methods to minimise bias, prior to any definitive conclusions being made regarding the efficacy of alginate dressings in the management of venous leg ulcers.
in infants with meconium aspiration syndrome, lung lavage with diluted surfactant may be beneficial, but additional controlled clinical trials of lavage therapy should be conducted to confirm the treatment effect, to refine the method of lavage treatment, and to compare lavage treatment with other approaches, including surfactant bolus therapy. long-term outcomes should be evaluated in further clinical trials.
ssris appeared to improve dependence, disability, neurological impairment, anxiety and depression after stroke, but there was heterogeneity between trials and methodological limitations in a substantial proportion of the trials. large, well-designed trials are now needed to determine whether ssris should be given routinely to patients with stroke.
current evidence leads to uncertainty whether mild cdad needs to be treated. the studies provide little evidence for antibiotic treatment of severe cdad as many studies excluded these patients. considering the two goals of therapy: improvement of the patient's clinical condition and prevention of spread of c. difficile infection to other patients, one should choose the antibiotic that brings both symptomatic cure and bacteriologic cure. a recommendation to achieve these goals cannot be made because of the small numbers of patients in the included studies and the high risk of bias in these studies, especially related to dropouts. most of the active comparator studies found no statistically significant difference in efficacy between vancomycin and other antibiotics including metronidazole, fusidic acid, nitazoxanide or rifaximin. teicoplanin may be an attractive choice but for its limited availability (teicoplanin is not available in the usa) and great cost relative to the other options. more research of antibiotic treatment and other treatment modalities of cdad is required.
there were few trials, reporting few clinical outcomes and mostly with unclear trial methodology and inadequate follow up. there is not enough evidence to detect clinical benefits of vitamin b6 supplementation in pregnancy and/or labour other than one trial suggesting protection against dental decay. future trials assessing this and other outcomes such as orofacial clefts, cardiovascular malformations, neurological development, preterm birth, pre-eclampsia and adverse events are required.
currently there is insufficient evidence on the benefits and harms of immediate delivery compared with deferred delivery in cases of suspected fetal compromise at preterm gestations to make firm recommendations to guide clinical practice. where there is uncertainty whether or not to deliver a preterm fetus with suspected fetal compromise, there seems to be no benefit to immediate delivery. deferring delivery until test results worsen or increasing gestation favours delivery may improve the outcomes for mother and baby. more research is needed to guide clinical practice.
in patients who are haemodynamically stable, the rrt modality does not appear to influence important patient outcomes, and therefore the preference for crrt over irrt in such patients does not appear justified in the light of available evidence. crrt was shown to achieve better haemodynamic parameters such as map. future research should focus on factors such as the dose of dialysis and evaluation of newer promising hybrid technologies such as sled. triallists should follow the recommendations regarding clinical endpoints assessment in rcts in arf made by the working group of the acute dialysis quality initiative working group.
there is insufficient evidence to justify the use of corticosteroids in managing dengue shock syndrome. as corticosteroids can potentially do harm, clinicians should not use them unless they are participating in a randomized controlled trial comparing corticosteroids with placebo.
there are insufficient data concerning the effect of heparin for prolonging piv catheter use in neonates. recommendations for heparin use in neonates with piv catheters cannot be made. further research on the effectiveness, the optimal dose, and the safety of heparin is required.
the limited evidence available (n = 24) found no significant difference between msg or the control challenge for the number of subjects who had a maximum fall in fev1 greater than 15% or 200 ml. there is no evidence to support the avoidance of msg in adults with chronic asthma, but as data were limited, this review cannot provide a reliable evidence base for determining whether msg avoidance is a worthwhile strategy. we could not find any studies conducted on the effect of msg in children with chronic asthma. there is therefore, a need for further rcts to investigate any relationship between msg and asthma, especially in children.
the main aim of this review was to determine the best treatment for cryptococcal meningitis in resource-limited settings. in these settings usually only amb and fluconazole are available. no studies suitable for inclusion in the review were found that compared these two drugs. therefore we are unable to recommend either treatment as superior to the other. the recommended treatment for cm is a combination of amb and flucytosine. the optimal dosing of amb remains unclear. liposomal amb is associated with less adverse events than amb and may be useful in selected patients where resources allow.future research into the management of cryptococcal meningitis in resource-limited settings should focus on the most effective use of medications that are available in these settings.flucytosine in combination with amb leads to faster and increased sterilisation of csf compared to using amb alone. as flucytosine is often not available in developing countries, policy makers and national departments of heath should consider procuring this drug for hiv treatment programmes.
nurse follow-up programmes and interventions to manage breathlessness may produce beneficial effects. counselling may help patients cope more effectively with emotional symptoms, but the evidence is not conclusive. other psychotherapeutic, psychosocial and educational interventions can play some role in improving patients' quality of life. exercise programmes and nutritional interventions have not shown relevant and lasting improvements of quality of life. reflexology may have some beneficial effects in the short term.
based on a small number of trials, in which there are potential sources of bias, clonidine is effective in promoting smoking cessation. prominent side-effects limit the usefulness of clonidine for smoking cessation.
firm conclusions on the efficacy of physical methods of treatment cannot be made as we identified only one small rct that was of short duration. more larger and longer term rcts are needed in this area. current screening tools for depression are recognised to have poor specificity in the medically ill due to overlap of somatic symptoms of the medical illness. the development of a valid diagnostic tool would be helpful.
based on limited amounts of data, sumatriptan 25 mg, administered rectally, is an effective treatment for acute migraine attacks, with participants in these studies experiencing a significant reduction in headache pain and functional disability within two hours of treatment. the lack of data on relief of headache-associated symptoms or incidence of adverse events limits any conclusions that can be drawn.
currently no clear evidence exists on the best psychological interventions to help people with cf and their carers manage the disease. trials of interventions to improve adherence to treatment are needed. multicentre approaches, with consequent funding implications, will increase the sample size of trials and enhance the power and precision of their findings.
workplace interventions to prevent hiv are feasible. there is moderate quality evidence that vct offered at the work site increases the uptake of testing. even though this did no lower hiv-incidence, there was a decrease in self-reported sexual transmitted diseases and a decrease in risky sexual behaviour. there is low quality evidence that educational interventions decrease sexually transmitted diseases, unprotected sex and sex with commercial sex workers but not sex with multiple partners and the use of alcohol before sex. more and better randomised trials are needed directed at high risk groups such as truck drivers or workers in areas with a very high hiv prevalence such as southern africa. risky sexual behaviour should be measured in a standardised way.
hydrocortisone may be as effective as dopamine when used as a primary treatment for hypotension. but the long term safety data on the use of hydrocortisone in this manner is unknown.steroids are effective in treatment of refractory hypotension in preterm infants without an increase in short term adverse consequences. however, long term safety or benefit data is lacking. with long term benefit or safety data lacking steroids cannot be recommended routinely for the treatment of hypotension in preterm infants.
there is a lack of high quality, valid research evidence regarding the effects of hbot on wound healing. whilst two small trials suggested that hbot may improve the outcomes of skin grafting and trauma these trials were at risk of bias. further evaluation by means of high quality rcts is needed.
apart from two small studies evaluating primary care, no evidence in the form of concurrently controlled trials could be identified. while these two studies generally favour the use of primary care, the research designs of both its and cba studies are considered prone to bias, specifically selection and blinding of participants and assessors. therefore, these studies should be regarded with caution and there is little clear evidence for the effective use of any specific model of care in residential aged care to benefit either residents or care staff. research in this area is clearly needed.
there is insufficient evidence to support a certain amount of time for women to remain recumbent following et, or to support the use of fibrin sealants. finally, there is limited evidence to support the use of mechanical closure of the cervical canal following et. further well-designed and powered studies are required to determine the true effect, if any, of these and other post et techniques for women undergoing ivf and icsi.
current but limited evidence support the use of 23-valent pneumococcal vaccine as routine management in adults with bronchiectasis. circumstantial evidence also support the use of routine 23-valent pneumococcal vaccination in children with bronchiectasis. further randomised controlled trials examining the efficacy of this intervention using various vaccine types in different age groups are needed. there is no data on the efficacy of pneumococcal vaccine on pulmonary decline. with the lack of evidence in how often the vaccine should be given, it is recommended that health providers adhere to national guidelines.
we found no evidence that either direct or indirect voice training or the two combined are effective in improving self-reported vocal functioning when compared to no intervention. the current practice of giving training to at-risk populations for preventing the development of voice disorders is therefore not supported by definitive evidence of effectiveness. larger and methodologically better trials are needed with outcome measures that better reflect the aims of interventions.
there is not enough evidence to make recommendations about the value of acupuncture in asthma treatment. further research needs to consider the complexities and different types of acupuncture.
the case for efficacy of excitatory amino acid inhibitor therapy remains unproven. to date, no product has proven to be efficacious (as determined by the criteria applied) for improving the outcomes of brain-injured patients. early termination, unpublished, and underpowered studies limit a clear appreciation of the merits of this form of intervention. additional studies, some of which remain in progress, may more clearly define the efficacy and effectiveness issues.
we found no evidence to support or reject the administration of rhufviia for patients with liver disease and upper gastrointestinal bleeding. further adequately powered randomised clinical trials are needed in order to evaluate the proper role of rhufviia for treating upper gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with liver disease. although the results are based on trials with low risk of bias, the heterogeneity and the small sample size result in rather large confidence intervals that cannot exclude the possibility that the intervention has some beneficial or harmful effect. further trials with alow risk of bias are required to make more confident conclusions about the effects of the intervention.
the results of randomized controlled trials conducted in low-, middle-, and high-income countries provide no assurance that dot compared with self administration of treatment has any quantitatively important effect on cure or treatment completion in people receiving treatment for tuberculosis.
at present, it is uncertain whether the timing of chest radiotherapy as such is important for survival. the optimal integration of chemotherapy and chest radiotherapy in patients with limited-stage small cell lung cancer is unknown. further research is needed to establish the best combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy in this disease.
this review found no evidence that inhaled corticosteroids confer net advantages over systemic corticosteroids in the management of ventilator dependent preterm infants. neither inhaled steroids nor systemic steroids can be recommended as standard treatment for ventilated preterm infants. there was no evidence of difference in effectiveness or side-effect profiles for inhaled versus systemic steroids. a better delivery system guaranteeing selective delivery of inhaled steroids to the alveoli might result in beneficial clinical effects without increasing side-effects. to resolve this issue, studies are needed to identify the risk/benefit ratio of different delivery techniques and dosing schedules for the administration of these medications. the long-term effects of inhaled steroids, with particular attention to neurodevelopmental outcome, should be addressed in future studies.
for non-tubal subfertility, the results indicate no clear benefit for fsp over iui. therefore the advice offered to subfertile couples regarding the comparative use of fsp versus iui in the treatment of non-tubal subfertility should reflect this.
there is limited support for the widespread use of formal multi-session psychosocial interventions for reducing injection and sexual risk behaviour. brief standard education interventions appear to be a more cost-effective option. further research is required to assess if there are particular groups of drug users more likely to respond to such interventions.
trials comparing tnp with alternative treatments for chronic wounds have methodological flaws and data do demonstrate a beneficial effect of tnp on wound healing however more, better quality research is needed.
we found no evidence that adding hip core decompression to physical therapy achieves clinical improvement in people with sickle cell disease with avascular necrosis of bone compared to physical therapy alone. however, we highlight that our conclusion is based on one trial with high attrition rates. further randomised controlled trials are necessary to evaluate the role of hip-core depression for this clinical condition. endpoints should focus on participants' subjective experience (e.g. quality of life and pain) as well as more objective 'time-to-event' measures (e.g. mortality, survival, hip longevity). the availability of participants to allow adequate trial power will be a key consideration for endpoint choice.
due to a small number of studies, large heterogeneity in interventions across trials, small sample sizes and poor reporting of outcomes, there was insufficient evidence to support or refute the effectiveness of surgery for lateral elbow pain. further well-designed randomised controlled trials and development of standard outcome measures are needed.
there is insufficient evidence to evaluate the effect of altering blood pressure on outcome during the acute phase of stroke. in patients with acute stroke, ccbs, acei, ara and gtn each lower blood pressure while phenylephrine probably increases blood pressure.
parent training may have a positive effect on the behaviour of children with adhd. it may also reduce parental stress and enhance parental confidence. however, the poor methodological quality of the included studies increases the risk of bias in the results. data concerning adhd-specific behaviour are ambiguous. for many important outcomes, including school achievement and adverse effects, data are lacking. evidence from this review is not strong enough to form a basis for clinical practice guidelines. future research should ensure better reporting of the study procedures and results.
there is limited evidence from randomised controlled trials for the effectiveness of behavioural interventions to reduce the transmission of hiv infection among sex workers and their clients in high-income countries. further randomised controlled trials are very likely to have important impacts on our confidence in the estimates of the effects, and are likely to change the estimates for effective interventions with outcomes of hiv incidence or prevalence and a variety of different settings among sex workers and their clients in high-income countries. randomised controlled trials that test for the identification of effective interventions for hiv prevention with outcomes of biological endpoints, such as hiv incidence or prevalence, are needed for these neglected populations. more research is also needed for male or transgender sex workers and their clients in high-income countries.
d-penicillamine appears to have a clinically and statistically significant benefit on the disease activity of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. its efficacy appears to be similar to that of other disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (dmards), but with a significantly higher toxicity. its effects on long-term functional status and radiological progression are not clear from this review.
temozolomide when given in both concomitant and adjuvant phases is an effective primary therapy in gbm compared to radiotherapy alone. it prolongs survival and delays progression without impacting on qol but it does increase early adverse events. in recurrent gbm, temozolomide compared with standard chemotherapy improves time-to-progression (ttp) and may have benefits on qol without increasing adverse events but it does not improve overall. in the elderly, temozolomide alone appears comparable to radiotherapy in terms of os and pfs but with a higher instance of adverse events.
the evidence from randomised controlled trials so far does not confirm or refute that es around the shoulder after stroke influences reports of pain, but there do appear to be benefits for passive humeral lateral rotation. a possible mechanism is through the reduction of glenohumeral subluxation. further studies are required.
amphotericin b has been disfavoured in several of the trials through their design or analysis, or both. since intravenous amphotericin b is the only antifungal agent for which an effect on mortality has been shown, and since it is considerably cheaper than fluconazole, it should be the preferred agent.
limited evidence from two small trials suggests that pro 140 might demonstrate potent, dose-dependent, highly significant antiviral activity. the evidence is insufficient, so recommendations cannot yet be made. larger, longer-term, double-blind rcts are required to provide conclusive evidence.
data from two small studies suggest that the combination of nicotine and mecamylamine may be superior to nicotine alone in promoting smoking cessation. however, these results require confirmation in larger studies before the treatment can be recommended clinically.
ihcas appear to have largely positive effects on users, in that users tend to become more knowledgeable, feel better socially supported, and may have improved behavioural and clinical outcomes compared to non-users. there is a need for more high quality studies with large sample sizes to confirm these preliminary findings, to determine the best type and best way to deliver ihcas, and to establish how ihcas have their effects for different groups of people with chronic illness.
according to the results of this review, there is some evidence that relaxation during pregnancy reduces stress and anxiety. however, there was no effect on ptl/ptb. these results should be interpreted with caution as they were drawn from included studies with limited quality.
reducing cigarettes smoked before quit day and quitting abruptly, with no prior reduction, produced comparable quit rates, therefore patients can be given the choice to quit in either of these ways. reduction interventions can be carried out using self-help materials or aided by behavioural support, and can be carried out with the aid of pre-quit nrt. further research needs to investigate which method of reduction before quitting is the most effective, and which categories of smokers benefit the most from each method, to inform future policy and intervention development.
fluocinonide cream may be more effective than hydrocortisone in treating people with discoid lupus erythematosus. hydroxychloroquine and acitretin appear to be of equal efficacy, although adverse effects are more frequent and more severe with acitretin. there is not enough reliable evidence about other drugs used to treat discoid lupus erythematosus.
routine endotracheal intubation at birth in vigorous term meconium-stained babies has not been shown to be superior to routine resuscitation including oro-pharyngeal suction. this procedure cannot be recommended for vigorous infants until more research is available.
there is some evidence to support the use of long intravenous lines rather than short intravenous lines, in terms of lifespan of the line and patient satisfaction. there is no evidence to suggest that any one type of long intravenous line is superior, and currently choice of line should be determined by operator and patient preference. there are numerous devices available which are used in cystic fibrosis. further research is required to identify clinically important differences between these devices.
pimozide is an effective treatment for tics in tourette syndrome, though the number of trials comparing its effect to placebo and other drugs is limited. trials of longer duration (minimum six months) are needed to investigate the longer-term effects of pimozide compared to atypical neuroleptics. future trials should use the yale global tic severity scale to assess the main outcome measure, and quantify adverse events with the extrapyramidal symptoms rating scale.
the evidence for the benefits and risks of correcting metabolic acidosis is very limited with no rcts in pre-esrd patients, none in children, and only three small trials in dialysis patients. these trials suggest there may be some beneficial effects on both protein and bone metabolism but the trials were underpowered to provide robust evidence.
this review suggests that a decrease in septic abdominal complications may exist when laparoscopic surgery is used to correct perforated peptic ulcer. however, it is necessary to perform more randomized controlled trials with a greater number of patients to confirm such an assumption, guaranteeing a long learning curve for participating surgeons. with the information provided it could be said that laparoscopic surgery results are not clinically different from those of open surgery.
there is no evidence that follicular aspiration and flushing is associated with improved clinical or ongoing pregnancy rates, nor an increase in oocyte yield. the operative time is significantly longer and more opiate analgesia is required for pain relief during oocyte retrieval. there is a lack of evidence regarding the effect of follicular aspiration and flushing on live birth rates in the identified data.
given the chronic nature of bms, the need to identify an effective mode of treatment for sufferers is vital. however, there is little research evidence that provides clear guidance for those treating patients with bms. further trials, of high methodological quality, need to be undertaken in order to establish effective forms of treatment for patients suffering from bms.
short-course treatment (3 to 6 days) could be sufficient for treating uncomplicated utis in elderly women, although more studies on specific commonly prescribed antibiotics are needed.
the included studies in this review were small and from single centres. neither study was completely clear about it's method of treatment allocation. one study described the use of pentoxifylline tablets (three 600 mg tablets daily) and the other the use of enhanced external counterpulsation (eecp) combined with haemodilution. both studies indicated improved retinal perfusion in the non-control group but neither showed an improvement in vision. large, well-designed rcts are still required to establish the most effective treatment for acute crao. these studies should be looking at factors important to the patient i.e. improved vision with acceptable risk/side-effects.
the available evidence has low numbers and is heterogeneous. at present psychosocial treatments alone are not adequately proved treatment modalities or superior to any other type of treatment.it is important to develop a better evidence base for psychosocial interventions to assist in future rationale planning of opioid use drug treatment services.
although its use can be limited by the incidence of serious toxicity, injectable gold has an important clinically and statistically significant benefit in the short term treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
there is no consistent evidence that anxiolytics aid smoking cessation, but the available evidence does not rule out a possible effect.
three days of antibiotic therapy is similar to 5-10 days in achieving symptomatic cure during uncomplicated uti treatment, while the longer treatment is more effective in obtaining bacteriological cure. in spite of the higher rate of adverse effects, treatment for 5-10 days could be considered for treatment of women in whom eradication of bacteriuria is important.
there are a limited number of rigorous evaluations to base policy on. active local educational interventions involving secondary care specialists and structured referral sheets are the only interventions shown to impact on referral rates based on current evidence. the effects of 'in-house' second opinion and other intermediate primary care based alternatives to outpatient referral appear promising.
based upon our review of 14 trials examining heterogeneous interventions and all susceptible to bias, we cannot draw firm conclusions about the effectiveness or safety of surgery for rotator cuff disease. there is "silver" (www.cochranemsk.org) level evidence from three trials that there are no significant differences in outcome between open or arthroscopic subacromial decompression and active non-operative treatment for impingement. there is also "silver" level evidence from six trials that there are no significant differences in outcome between arthroscopic and open subacromial decompression although four trials reported earlier recovery with arthroscopic decompression.
the included studies do not demonstrate any evidence to support the use of topical treatments prior to the use of a fibre-optic nasal endoscope. some go as far as to suggest that these agents should not be used due to cost and unpleasant side effects. five studies did not demonstrate any advantage in terms of reducing pain or discomfort when using a topical treatment prior to endoscopy. the absence of demonstrable effect may be due to relatively small patient groups. it is therefore possible that there is a small effect of using these sprays. further research using standardised reporting methods is needed.
due to the limited nature of the available evidence and the mixed results that were found, no strong statements can be made about the effectiveness of communicating medical imaging results to change health behaviour. only three trials in clinical populations were similar enough in term of setting, intervention and outcome to allow meta-analysis. we suggest, however, that targeted interventions using medical imaging technologies may be effective in certain contexts, or as applied to certain behaviours, but that this should be considered on an intervention by intervention basis, and not assumed as a general principle.
there is moderate evidence suggesting that back schools, in an occupational setting, reduce pain, and improve function and return-to-work status, in the short and intermediate-term, compared to exercises, manipulation, myofascial therapy, advice, placebo or waiting list controls, for patients with chronic and recurrent lbp. however, future trials should improve methodological quality and clinical relevance and evaluate the cost-effectiveness of back schools.
based on a heterogeneous sample of studies, there is currently no evidence of an effect of medication alone, enhanced primary care, psychological interventions or the combination of those with medication on sickness absence of depressed workers. in future rcts, interventions should specifically address work issues, and occupational outcomes should be used to measure the effect..
currently limited and inconclusive data are unable to detect an association between topical corticosteroids and congenital abnormality, preterm delivery, or stillbirth. the current evidence shows no statistically significant difference between pregnant women who use and those who do not use topical corticosteroids. however, there does appear to be an association of very potent topical corticosteroids with low birthweight. cohort studies with comprehensive outcome measures, assessment of effects of corticosteroid potency and dose, application methods, and reasons for giving them, and a very large sample size are needed.
the limited evidence base appears to support the use of thrombin injection as an effective treatment for femoral pseudoaneurysm. a pragmatic approach may be to use compression (blind or ultrasound-guided) as first-line treatment, reserving thrombin injection for those in whom the compression procedure fails.
rivastigmine appears to improve cognition and activities of daily living in patients with pdd. this results in clinically meaningful benefit in about 15% of cases. there is a need for more studies utilising pragmatic measures such as time to residential care facility and both patient and carer quality of life assessments. future trials should involve other cholinesterase inhibitors, utilise tools to analyse the data that limit any bias and measure health economic factors. it is unlikely that relying solely on the last observation carried forward (locf) is sufficient. publication of the observed case data in the largest trial would assist (emre 2004). adverse events were associated with the cholinergic activity of rivastigmine, but may limit patient acceptability as evidenced by the high drop out rate in the active arm.
chinese herbal medicines may shorten the symptomatic phase in patients with the common cold. however, the lack of trials of low enough risk of bias, or using a placebo or a drug clearly identified as a control, means that we are uncertain enough to be unable to recommend any kind of chinese medicinal herbs for the common cold.
the available evidence demonstrates that the use of clopidogrel plus aspirin is associated with a reduction in the risk of cardiovascular events and an increased risk of bleeding compared with aspirin alone. only in patients with acute non-st coronary syndrome benefits outweigh harms.
at present there is not enough evidence to recommend the use of interferon alfa-2a for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration.
use of corticosteroids within 1 hour of presentation to an ed significantly reduces the need for hospital admission in patients with acute asthma. benefits appear greatest in patients with more severe asthma, and those not currently receiving steroids. children appear to respond well to oral steroids.
high-flux haemodialysis may reduce cardiovascular mortality in people requiring haemodialysis by about 15%. a large well-designed rct is now required to confirm this finding.
despite about a 3% perioperative stroke or death rate, cea for asymptomatic carotid stenosis reduces the risk of ipsilateral stroke, and any stroke, by approximately 30% over three years. however, the absolute risk reduction is small (approximately 1% per annum over the first few years of follow up in the two largest and most recent trials) but it could be higher with longer follow up.
small trials of limited quality suggest that vitamin e may protect against deterioration of td. there is no evidence that vitamin e improves symptoms of this problematic and disfiguring condition once established. new and better trials are indicated in this under-researched area, and, of the many adjunctive treatments that have been given for td, vitamin e would be a good choice for further evaluation.
omentoplasty may provide an additional benefit to decrease the incidence of anastomotic leakage after esophagectomy and esophagogastrostomy for esophageal cancer patients without increasing or decreasing other complications, especially for those patients treated with the. further randomized controlled trials are still needed to investigate the influences of omentoplasty in different operation procedures of esophagectomy and esophagogastrostomy on the incidence of anastomotic leakage, anastomotic stricture, long-term survival rate and quality of life after esophagectomy and esophagogastrostomy.
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether wound drains after incisional hernia repair are associated with better or worse outcomes than no drains.
the available trial data do not provide evidence that glutamine supplementation confers important benefits for preterm infants.
this systematic review of randomised controlled trials of calcium channel blockers in acute traumatic head injury patients shows that considerable uncertainty remains over their effects. the effect of nimodipine in a subgroup of brain injury patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage shows a beneficial effect, though the increase in adverse reactions suffered by the intervention group may mean that the drug is harmful for some patients.
the small sample sizes, variable methodological quality and heterogeneity in terms of population studied, physiotherapy intervention employed and length of follow up of randomised controlled trials of physiotherapy interventions results in little overall evidence to guide treatment. there is evidence to support the use of some interventions in specific and circumscribed cases. there is a need for trials of physiotherapy interventions for specific clinical conditions associated with shoulder pain, for shoulder pain where combinations of physiotherapy interventions, as well as, physiotherapy interventions as an adjunct to other, non physiotherapy interventions are compared. this is more reflective of current clinical practice. trials should be adequately powered and address key methodological criteria such as allocation concealment and blinding of outcome assessor.
at present there is little evidence from long term rcts to recommend the use of antiplatelet therapy to prevent thromboembolism in patients with heart failure in sinus rhythm. a possible interaction with ace inhibitors may reduce the efficacy of aspirin, although this evidence is mainly from retrospective analyses of trial cohorts and two rcts. there is also no current evidence to support the use of oral anticoagulation (when compared to aspirin/clopidogrel) in patients with heart failure in sinus rhythm. anticoagulation/antiplatelet therapy should be reserved for heart failure patients with other comorbidities (such as atrial fibrillation or underlying coronary artery disease) who may still benefit from these therapies.
the available evidence from randomised controlled trials is insufficient to establish the relative effectiveness of the various interventions used in the rehabilitation of adults with fractures of the distal radius.
while urodynamic tests may change clinical decision making, there was not enough evidence to suggest whether this would result in better clinical outcomes. there was no evidence abut their use in men, children or people with neurological diseases. larger definitive trials are needed, in which people are randomly allocated to management according to urodynamic findings or to standard management based on history and clinical examination.
there was weak evidence to support the use of hypnosis, psychotherapy, acupuncture, chiropractic and medicinal herbs but it was provided in each case by single small trials, some of dubious methodological rigour. robust randomised trials are required with efficacy, cost-effectiveness and adverse effects clearly reported.
conclusions about the efficacy of surgery in nsclc are limited by the volume and quality of the current evidence base, however lung cancer resection combined with complete mediastinal lymph node dissection is associated with a modest improvement in survival compared with lung cancer resection combined with systematic sampling of mediastinal nodes in patients with stage i to iiia nsclc. current evidence suggests that in stage iiia n2 nsclc, chemotherapy followed by surgery is as effective as chemotherapy followed by radical radiotherapy, and radical concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy is as effective as induction chemoradiation followed by surgery in terms of overall survival.
the limited available evidence suggests that alpha blockers increase success rates of twoc. alpha blocker side effects are low and comparable to placebo. it is uncertain whether alpha blockers reduce the risk of recurrent urinary retention and need for prostate surgery. the cost effectiveness and recommended duration of alpha blocker treatment after successful twoc remains unknown. there are a lack of internationally agreed outcome measures for what constitutes successful twoc. this makes meta-analysis difficult. more randomised clinical trials are needed to address these issues.
general physical health could lead to people with serious mental illness accessing more health services which, in turn, could mean they see longer term benefits such as reduced mortality or morbidity. on the other hand it is possible clinicians are expending much effort, time and financial expenditure on giving ineffective advice. this is an important area for good research reporting outcome of interest to carers and people with serious illnesses as well as researchers and fundholders. note: the 43 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.
laparoscopic surgery results in improved pain outcomes when compared to diagnostic laparoscopy alone. there were few women diagnosed with severe endometriosis included in the meta-analysis and therefore any conclusions from this meta-analysis regarding treatment of severe endometriosis should be made with caution. it is not possible to draw conclusions from the meta-analysis which specific laparoscopic surgical intervention is most effective.
the limited data from the included studies failed to show strong evidence of the efficacy of sound therapy in tinnitus management. the absence of conclusive evidence should not be interpreted as evidence of lack of effectiveness. the lack of quality research in this area, in addition to the common use of combined approaches (hearing therapy plus counselling) in the management of tinnitus are, in part, responsible for the lack of conclusive evidence. other combined forms of management, such as tinnitus retraining therapy, have been subject to a cochrane review. optimal management may involve multiple strategies.
the evidence base was found to be limited with variable results and missing data, and therefore it was not possible to adequately assess the effect of email for clinical communication between patients/caregivers and healthcare professionals. recommendations for clinical practice could not be made. future research should ideally address the issue of missing data and methodological concerns by adhering to published reporting standards. the rapidly changing nature of technology should be taken into account when designing and conducting future studies and barriers to trial development and implementation should also be tackled. potential outcomes of interest for future research include cost-effectiveness and health service resource use.
there is not enough evidence to show any difference between magnesium maintenance therapy compared with either placebo or no treatment, or alternative therapies (ritodrine or terbutaline) in preventing preterm birth after an episode of threatened preterm labour.
general health checks did not reduce morbidity or mortality, neither overall nor for cardiovascular or cancer causes, although the number of new diagnoses was increased. important harmful outcomes, such as the number of follow-up diagnostic procedures or short term psychological effects, were often not studied or reported and many trials had methodological problems. with the large number of participants and deaths included, the long follow-up periods used, and considering that cardiovascular and cancer mortality were not reduced, general health checks are unlikely to be beneficial.
it is unclear if interventions to improve appropriate polypharmacy, such as pharmaceutical care, resulted in a clinically significant improvement; however, they appear beneficial in terms of reducing inappropriate prescribing and medication-related problems.
there is little empirical evidence on the effects of grant giving peer review. no studies assessing the impact of peer review on the quality of funded research are presently available. experimental studies assessing the effects of grant giving peer review on importance, relevance, usefulness, soundness of methods, soundness of ethics, completeness and accuracy of funded research are urgently needed. practices aimed to control and evaluate the potentially negative effects of peer review should be implemented meanwhile.
moderate-quality evidence shows significantly more improvement with plasma exchange than supportive care alone in adults with guillain-barré syndrome without a significant increase in serious adverse events. there was a small but significant increase in the risk of relapse during the first six to 12 months after onset in people treated with plasma exchange compared with those that were not treated. despite this, after one year, full recovery was significantly more likely and severe residual weakness less likely with plasma exchange.
the use of early epo did not significantly reduce the 'use of one or more rbc transfusions' or the 'number of transfusions per infant" compared with late epo administration. the finding of a statistically significant increased risk of rop (any grade) and a similar trend for rop stage > 3 with early epo treatment is of great concern.
few rcts have evaluated the effects of pre-emptive therapy to prevent cmv disease. pre-emptive therapy is effective compared with placebo or standard care. despite the inclusion of five additional studies in this update, the efficacy of pre-emptive therapy compared with prophylaxis to prevent cmv disease remains unclear due to significant heterogeneity between studies. additional head-to-head studies are required to determine the relative benefits and harms of pre-emptive therapy and prophylaxis to prevent cmv disease in solid organ transplant recipients.
steroids could have important clinical benefits, but the trials published to date are too small to demonstrate an effect. this requires large placebo controlled trials. subgroup analysis could explore whether effusion or fibrosis modify the effects. therapeutic pericardiocentesis under local anaesthesia and pericardiectomy also require further evaluation.
flunarizine may have a weak effect on seizure frequency but had a significant withdrawal rate, probably due to adverse effects, and should not be recommended for use as an add-on treatment. similarly, there is no convincing evidence to support the use of nifedipine or nimodipine as add-on treatments for epilepsy.
pge1 was beneficial for many participants with ed of different aetiology. adverse effects were proportional to dosage, albeit never serious. the use of pge1 in ed could have been better interpreted if its effectiveness were compared by aetiology and with different forms of administrations, a longer follow-up were considered and more emphasis given to patient/partner relationships and quality of life.
this review found that there is insufficient high quality evidence to determine whether or not kl and tl gcs differ in their effectiveness in terms of reducing the incidence of deep vein thrombosis (dvt) in hospitalised patients. a major multicentre rct is required to address this issue. in the meantime, the decision on which type of stocking to use in clinical practice is likely to be influenced by factors such as patient compliance, ease of use and cost implications.
there is limited evidence that weak oral opioids may be effective analgesics for some patients with ra, but adverse effects are common and may offset the benefits of this class of medications. there is insufficient evidence to draw conclusions regarding the use of weak opioids for longer than six weeks, or the role of strong opioids.
isoniazid prevents active tb in diverse at-risk patients, and six- and 12-month regimens have a similar effect. the most recent trial included in the review was published in 1994, and we have not identified any relevant trials up to 2003. we therefore do not plan to update this review.
ticlopidine plus aspirin after coronary stenting is effective in reducing the risk of the revascularization, non fatal myocardial infarction and bleeding complications when compared with oral anticoagulants. no effect is observed on total mortality. however, the haematological side effects of ticlopidine are still a matter of concern, and strict monitoring of blood-cell counts is recommended. physicians should also be aware of the possibility of rare although potentially life-threatening complications such as ttp
cabergoline appears to reduce the risk of ohss in high-risk women, especially for moderate ohss. the use of cabergoline does not affect the pregnancy outcome (clinical pregnancy rate, miscarriage rate), nor is there an increased risk of adverse events. further research should consider the risk of administering cabergoline and the comparison between cabergoline and established treatments (such as intravenous albumin and coasting). large, well-designed and well-executed rcts that involve more clinical endpoints are necessary to further evaluate the role of cabergoline in ohss prevention.
total shoulder arthroplasty seems to offer an advantage in terms of shoulder function, with no other clinical benefits over hemiarthroplasty. more studies are needed to compare clinical outcomes of surgery using different components and techniques in patients with osteoarthritis of the shoulder. there is a need for studies comparing shoulder surgery to sham, placebo and other non-surgical treatment options.
although there are shortcomings and gaps in the data, there appears to be enough consistency over different outcomes and periods to confirm that trifluoperazine is an antipsychotic of similar efficacy to other commonly used neuroleptics for people with schizophrenia. its adverse events profile is similar to that of other drugs. it has been claimed that trifluoperazine is effective at low doses for patients with schizophrenia but this does not appear to be based on good quality trial based evidence.
these small trials suggest that for people with lrti affecting tissues of the head, neck, anus and rectum, hbot is associated with improved outcome. hbot also appears to reduce the chance of orn following tooth extraction in an irradiated field. there was no such evidence of any important clinical effect on neurological tissues. the application of hbot to selected patients and tissues may be justified. further research is required to establish the optimum patient selection and timing of any therapy. an economic evaluation should be undertaken.
at this stage, reminding patients seems the most promising intervention to increase adherence to lipid lowering drugs. the lack of a gold standard method of measuring adherence is one major barrier in adherence research. more reliable data might be achieved by newer methods of measurement, more consistency in adherence assessment and longer duration of follow up. more recent studies have started using more reliable methods for data collection but follow-up periods remain too short. increased patient-centredness with emphasis on the patient's perspective and shared decision-making might lead to more conclusive answers when searching for tools to encourage patients to take lipid lowering medication.
while the results of zinc for reducing sickle-related crises are encouraging, larger and longer-term multicenter studies are needed to evaluate the effectiveness of this therapy for people with sickle cell disease. while the phase ii and the prematurely terminated phase iii studies of senicapoc showed that the drug improved red cell survival (depending on dose), this did not lead to fewer painful crises.
we identified three small studies addressing cleansing of pressure ulcers. one reported a statistically significant improvement in pressure ulcer healing for wounds cleansed with saline spray containing aloe vera, silver chloride and decyl glucoside (vulnopur) compared with isotonic saline solution, a further study reported no statistically significant change in healing was seen when wounds were cleaned with water was compared with saline. a final study compared pulsatile lavage with sham and found a significantly greater reduction in ulcer volume at the end of the study period in the lavage group compared with the sham group. the authors conclude that there is no good trial evidence to support use of any particular wound cleansing solution or technique for pressure ulcers.
methylxanthine is effective in reducing the number of apnoeic attacks and the use of mechanical ventilation in the two to seven days after starting treatment. caffeine is also associated with better longer term outcomes. in view of its lower toxicity, caffeine would be the preferred drug for the treatment of apnoea.
there are insufficient data to support evidence-based recommendations regarding the use of adjunctive corticosteroids in people with tuberculous pleurisy. randomized controlled trials that are sufficiently powered to evaluate the effects of corticosteroids on both morbidity and mortality are needed. the effects of corticosteroids on hiv-related complications, such as kaposi sarcoma, should be assessed in people co-infected with hiv.
there is no evidence for recommending supplements of vitamins a, c, e, selenium, either alone or in different combinations, for the prevention of lung cancer and lung cancer mortality in healthy people. there is some evidence that the use of beta-carotene supplements could be associated with a small increase in lung cancer incidence and mortality in smokers or persons exposed to asbestos.
there are insufficient data to reliably assess the use of salbutamol for the prevention of cld. further clinical trials are necessary to assess the role of salbutamol or other bronchodilator agents in prophylaxis or treatment of cld. researchers studying the effects of bronchodilators in preterm infants should include relevant clinical outcomes in addition to pulmonary mechanical outcomes.
early application of cdp has a clinical benefit in the treatment of rds in that it reduces subsequent use of ippv and thus may be useful in preventing the adverse effects of this treatment. however, many of the trials were done in the 1970s and 1980s and re-evaluation of the strategy of early cdp in the era of antenatal steroid use and early surfactant administration is indicated focusing on administration methods.
presently, there are insufficient data to support or refute the use of ursodeoxycholic acid for patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver or steatohepatitis. it may be advisable to carry out large randomised clinical trials on this topic.
surgery and wbrt may improve fis but not overall survival. it may also reduce the proportion of deaths due to neurological cause. all these results were in a highly selected group of patients. patients undergoing surgery were not reported to have any higher risk of adverse events than patients who only had wbrt.
induction of labour in outpatient settings appears feasible. we do not have sufficient evidence to know which induction methods are preferred by women, or the interventions that are most effective and safe to use in outpatient settings.
rcts examining the effectiveness of passiflora for anxiety are too few in number to permit any conclusions to be drawn. rcts with larger samples that compare the effectiveness of passiflora with placebo and other types of medication, including antidepressants, are needed.
we didn't find any significant difference between the drugs compared both for mother and for child outcomes; the trials retrieved were too few and the sample size too small to make firm conclusion about the superiority of one treatment over another. there is an urgent need of big randomised controlled trials.
there is no evidence to suggest that probiotics are beneficial for the maintenance of remission in cd. all of the included studies enrolled small numbers of patients and may have lacked statistical power to show differences should they exist. larger trials are required to determine if probiotics are of benefit in crohn's disease.
the limited number of identified trials together with methodological weaknesses of many do not allow a definitive assessment of the role of anal sphincter exercises and biofeedback therapy in the management of people with faecal incontinence. we found some evidence that biofeedback and electrical stimulation may enhance the outcome of treatment compared to electrical stimulation alone or exercises alone. exercises appear to be less effective than an implanted sacral nerve stimulator. while there is a suggestion that some elements of biofeedback therapy and sphincter exercises may have a therapeutic effect, this is not certain. larger well-designed trials are needed to enable safe conclusions.
there is limited randomised controlled trial evidence available on the effect of exercise during pregnancy for preventing pregnancy glucose intolerance or gdm. results from three randomised trials with moderate risk of bias suggested no significant difference in gdm incidence between women receiving an additional exercise intervention and routine care. based on the limited data currently available, conclusive evidence is not available to guide practice. larger, well-designed randomised trials, with standardised behavioural interventions are needed to assess the effects of exercise on preventing gdm and other adverse pregnancy outcomes including large-for-gestational age and perinatal mortality. longer-term health outcomes for both women and their babies and health service costs should be included. several such trials are in progress. we identified another seven trials which are ongoing and we will consider these for inclusion in the next update of this review.
compared with control, there was no evidence of benefit from long-term anticoagulant therapy in people with presumed non-cardioembolic ischaemic stroke or transient ischaemic attack, but there was a significant bleeding risk.
'joel-cohen based' methods have advantages compared to pfannenstiel and to traditional (lower midline) cs techniques, which could translate to savings for the health system. however, these trials do not provide information on mortality and serious or long-term morbidity such as morbidly adherent placenta and scar rupture. [note: the 19 citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
there is currently insufficient evidence that exercises or prescription of single lens glasses to multifocal users prevent falls or decrease the number of people falling after being discharged from rehabilitation following their stroke. two studies testing vitamin d versus placebo and alendronate versus alphacalcidol found a significant reduction in falls and the number of people falling. however, these findings should be replicated before the results are implemented in clinical practice.
the evidence from randomised controlled trials shows that intravenous immunoglobulin improves disability for at least two to six weeks compared with placebo, with a number needed to treat of 3.00. during this period it has similar efficacy to plasma exchange and oral prednisolone. in one large trial, benefit of ivig persisted for 24 and possibly 48 weeks.
there is insufficient trial evidence to evaluate the effects of antiviral agents with controls or with each other. the rarity of the condition makes effectively powered clinical trials difficult to perform. the efficacy of newer antiviral agents with better bioavailability (e.g. valaciclovir, valganciclovir) for the treatment of neonatal disease needs to be evaluated in randomised trials. the efficacy of oral formulations need to be evaluated as they may be useful for infants with skin, eye or mouth hsv disease or in the treatment of infants with recurrences after the neonatal period.
mifepristone reduced heavy menstrual bleeding and improved fibroid-specific quality of life. however, it was not found to reduce fibroid volume. further well-designed, adequately powered rcts are needed before a recommendation can be made on the use of mifepristone for the treatment of uterine fibroids.
treatment with adjusted-dose warfarin to achieved inrs of 2 to 3 reduces stroke, disabling or fatal stroke, and death for patients with non-valvular af. the benefits were not substantially offset by increased bleeding among these participants in randomized clinical trials. limitations include relatively short follow up and imprecise estimates of bleeding risks from the selected participants enrolled in the trials. for primary prevention of stroke in af patients, about 25 strokes and about 12 disabling or fatal strokes would be prevented yearly for every 1000 atrial fibrillation patients given oacs.
the available data are not sufficient to determine whether allopurinol has clinically important benefits for newborn infants with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy. much larger trials are needed. such trials could assess allopurinol as an adjunct to therapeutic hypothermia in infants with moderate and severe encephalopathy and should be designed to exclude important effects on mortality and adverse long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes.
given that haloperidol and chlorpromazine are global standard antipsychotic treatments for schizophrenia, it is surprising that less than 800 people have been randomised to a comparison and that incomplete reporting still makes it difficult for anyone to draw clear conclusions on the comparative effects of these drugs. however, it seems that haloperidol causes more movement disorders than chlorpromazine, while chlorpromazine is significantly more likely to lead to hypotonia. we are surprised to have to say that we feel further, large, well designed, conducted and reported studies are required.
there is insufficient evidence to support use of topical or systemic antimicrobial therapy for eradicating nasal or extra-nasal mrsa. there is no demonstrated superiority of either topical or systemic therapy, or of combinations of these agents. potentially serious adverse events and development of antimicrobial resistance can result from therapy.
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether use of thyroid hormones for treatment of preterm infants with transient hypothyroxinaemia results in changes in neonatal morbidity and mortality, or reductions in neurodevelopmental impairments. further research is required.
this review found that the existing evidence was insufficient to make any strong recommendations about the best approach to pelvic floor muscle training. we suggest that women are offered reasonably frequent appointments during the training period, because the few data consistently showed that women receiving regular (e.g. weekly) supervision were more likely to report improvement than women doing pelvic floor muscle training with little or no supervision.
electrical cardioversion (rhythm control) led to a non-significant increase in stroke risk but improved three domains of quality of life.
the study offers evidence that during laparoscopic abdominal surgery, heated gas insufflation, with or without humidification, has minimal benefit on patient outcomes.
there is no evidence of benefit from antibiotics for the common cold or for persisting acute purulent rhinitis in children or adults. there is evidence that antibiotics cause significant adverse effects in adults when given for the common cold and in all ages when given for acute purulent rhinitis. routine use of antibiotics for these conditions is not recommended.
when further testing to assess fetal well-being in labour is indicated, fetal scalp blood lactate estimation is more likely to be successfully undertaken than ph estimation. action cut-off lactate values need to consider the lactate meter used. further studies may consider sub-group analysis by gestational age, the stage of labour and sampling within a prolonged second stage of labour. additionally, future studies may address longer-term neonatal outcomes, maternal satisfaction with intrapartum fetal monitoring and an economic analysis.
there is no evidence for the effectiveness of npwt on complete healing of wounds expected to heal by primary intention. there are clear cost benefits when non-commercial systems are used to create the negative pressure required for wound therapy, with no apparent reduction in clinical outcome. pain levels are also rated lower when hospital systems are compared with their commercial counterparts. the high incidence of blisters occurring when npwt is used following orthopaedic surgery suggests that the therapy should be limited until safety in this population is established. given the cost and widespread use of npwt, there is an urgent need for suitably powered, high-quality trials to evaluate the effects of the newer npwt products that are designed for use on clean, closed surgical incisions. such trials should focus initially on wounds that may be difficult to heal, such as sternal wounds or surgeries for obese patients.
the evidence to date is insufficient to recommend use of antihelminthics for pregnant women after the first trimester of pregnancy. more well-designed, large scale randomised controlled trials are needed to establish the benefit of antihelminthic treatment during pregnancy.
oral fenoprofen 200 mg is effective at treating moderate to severe acute postoperative pain, based on limited data for at least 50% pain relief over 4 to 6 hours. efficacy of other doses, other efficacy outcomes, and safety and tolerability could not be assessed.
local analgesia infiltration and abdominal nerve blocks as adjuncts to regional analgesia and general anaesthesia are of benefit in caesarean section by reducing opioid consumption. nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as an adjuvant may confer additional pain relief.
superficial moist heat and cryotherapy can be used as palliative therapy. paraffin wax baths combined with exercises can be recommended for beneficial short-term effects for arthritic hands. these conclusions are limited by methodological considerations such as the poor quality of trials.
currently, there is a lack of convincing evidence to show a cognitive enhancing effect of panax ginseng in healthy participants and no high quality evidence about its efficacy in patients with dementia. randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group trials with large sample sizes are needed to further investigate the effect of ginseng on cognition in different populations, including dementia patients.
there is evidence that infection screening and treatment programs in pregnant women before 20 weeks gestation reduce preterm birth and preterm low birthweights. future trials should evaluate the effects of types of infection screening program and the costs of introducing an infection screening program.
women with recurrent genital herpes simplex virus should be informed that the risk of neonatal herpes is low. there is insufficient evidence to determine if antiviral prophylaxis reduces the incidence of neonatal herpes. antenatal antiviral prophylaxis reduces viral shedding and recurrences at delivery and reduces the need for cesarean delivery for genital herpes. limited information exists regarding the neonatal safety of prophylaxis. the risks, benefits, and alternatives to antenatal prophylaxis should be discussed with women who have a history and prophylaxis initiated for women who desire intervention.
data on the effectiveness and safety of amniotomy and intravenous oxytocin are lacking. no recommendations for clinical practice can be made on the basis of this review. amniotomy and intravenous oxytocin is a combination of two methods of induction of labour and both methods are utilised in clinical practice. if their use is to be continued it is important to compare the effectiveness and safety of these methods, and to define under which clinical circumstances one may be preferable to another. [note: the three citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
colchicine should not be used for alcoholic, viral, or cryptogenic liver fibrosis or liver cirrhosis outside randomised clinical trials.
there is very limited evidence from one study (browne 1997) to support the use of iv beta2-agonists in children with severe acute asthma with respect to shorter recovery time, and similarly there is limited evidence (again from one study browne 1997) suggesting benefit with regard to pulmonary index scores; however this advantage needs to be considered carefully in relation to the increased side effects associated with iv beta2-agonists. we identified no significant benefits for adults with severe acute asthma. until more, adequately powered, high quality clinical trials in this area are conducted it is not possible to form a robust evaluation of the addition of iv beta2-agonists in children or adults with severe acute asthma.
the evidence is neutral, neither for nor against seizure prophylaxis, in people with brain tumors. these conclusions apply only for the antiepileptic drugs phenytoin, phenobarbital, and divalproex sodium. the decision to start an antiepileptic drug for seizure prophylaxis is ultimately guided by assessment of individual risk factors and careful discussion with patients.
there is strong evidence from randomised controlled trials and observational trials that prophylaxis preserves joint function in children with hemophilia as compared to on-demand treatment. there is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials to confirm the observational evidence that prophylaxis decreases bleeding and related complications in patients with existing joint damage. well-designed randomised controlled trials and prospective observational controlled studies are needed to establish the best prophylactic regimen and to assess the effectiveness of prophylactic clotting factor concentrates in adult patients.
current evidence suggests that mtx does have minimal clinically significant effects (>20%) on patient centered disability measures in jia patients.
there is currently not enough evidence to support a policy of routine hospitalisation for bed rest in multiple pregnancy. no reduction in the risk of preterm birth or perinatal death is evident, although there is a suggestion that fetal growth may be improved. for women with an uncomplicated twin pregnancy the results of this review show no benefit from routine hospitalisation for bed rest. until further evidence is available, the policy cannot be recommended for routine clinical practice.
we did not find enough evidence to support or refute the use of bile acids in the treatment of primary sclerosing cholangitis. however, bile acids seem to lead to a significant improvement in liver biochemistry. therefore, more randomised trials are needed before any of the bile acids can be recommended for this indication.
results from 16 trials showed that suctioning with either closed or open tracheal suction systems did not have an effect on the risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia or mortality. more studies of high methodological quality are required, particularly to clarify the benefits and hazards of the closed tracheal suction system for different modes of ventilation and in different types of patients.
there is some evidence to support the use of ia steroid injections and resting a knee following injections but that wrists should not be rested following injections. the included studies involved adult participants so any conclusions can only cautiously applied to children. further research is required to examine the use and type of rest and the differential responses of different joints following injections.
there is evidence that the use of open mesh repair is associated with a reduction in the risk of recurrence of between 50% and 75%. although the trials were heterogenous there is also some evidence of quicker return to work and of lower rates of persisting pain following mesh repair.
family planning researchers and practitioners could adapt the effective interventions. reproductive health needs high-quality research on behavior change, especially for clinical and low-resource settings. more thorough use of single theories would help, as would better reporting on research design and intervention implementation.
there was 'low level' evidence that multidisciplinary rehabilitation can improve the outcomes of people with breast cancer in terms of functional ability, psychosocial adjustment and participation in social activities. there was no evidence available on functional gain at the level of activity. this review highlights the limitations of rcts in rehabilitation settings and the need for high-quality trial-based research in this area. regular evaluation and assessment of breast cancer survivors for rehabilitation is recommended.
the small number of relevant studies identified together with the small sample sizes and methodological weaknesses severely limit the usefulness of this review in guiding practice. the results from larger multicentre trials are needed.
the trials included in this review reported follow up at 18 and six months respectively but it is well-established that children with pfapa recover spontaneously and treatment can be administered to try and reduce the severity of individual episodes. therefore, the parents and carers of children with pfapa must weigh the risks and consequences of surgery (hospitalisation, a predictable period of time postoperatively away from school/nursery, the risks of surgery) against the alternative of a finite period of recurrent episodes of disease at predictable intervals, potentially requiring time off school and the regular use of medication. it is uncertain whether adenoidectomy combined with tonsillectomy adds any additional benefit to tonsillectomy alone.
mao-b inhibitors are one option for the early treatment of pd although they have weaker symptomatic effects than levodopa and dopamine agonists. they may reduce the rate of motor fluctuations compared with initial levodopa therapy and may have fewer significant adverse effects than the older agonists but data are too few to provide reliable conclusions.
this review suggests that the administration of amoxycillin and clavulanic acid prior to embryo transfer reduced upper genital tract microbial contamination but did not alter clinical pregnancy rates. the effect of this intervention on live birth is unknown. there are no data from randomised controlled trials to support or refute other antibiotic regimens in this setting. future research is warranted to assess the efficacy of alternative antibiotic regimens. researchers should assess live birth as the primary outcome and address quantitative microbial colonization as a secondary outcome.
prophylactic systemic antifungal therapy reduces the incidence of invasive fungal infection in very low birth weight infants. this finding should be interpreted and applied cautiously since the incidence of invasive fungal infection was very high in the control groups of most of the included trials. meta-analysis does not demonstrate a statistically significant effect on mortality. there are currently only limited data on the long-term neurodevelopmental consequences for infants exposed to this intervention. in addition, there is a need for further data on the effect of the intervention on the emergence of organisms with antifungal resistance.
we found no conclusive evidence that, while waiting for the full karyotype following amniocentesis, issuing results from a rapid analysis reduces maternal anxiety. the limited evidence from the two trials included in this review does not help resolve the dilemma about whether full karyotyping should be abandoned in favour of limited rapid testing for women undergoing down's syndrome screening. this choice will rest on clinical arguments and cost-effectiveness rather than impact on anxiety. there is also no evidence to support the view that issuing amniocentesis results as soon as they are available is more user friendly than using a pre-defined fixed date. studies evaluating the effect of different strategies for disclosing results on women anxiety for cvs are needed.
with the exception of one trial, this review has not shown effectiveness for educational interventions, including advice to activate, advice on stress-coping skills, workplace ergonomics and self-care strategies. future research should be founded on sound adult learning theory and learning skill acquisition.
sugammadex was shown to be effective in reversing rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade. this review has found no evidence of a difference in the instance of unwanted effects between sugammadex, placebo or neostigmine. these results need to be confirmed by future trials on larger patient populations and with more focus on patient-related outcomes.
ketoprofen at doses of 25 mg to 100 mg is an effective analgesic in moderate to severe acute postoperative pain with an nnt for at least 50% pain relief of 3.3 with a 50 mg dose. this is similar to that of commonly used nsaids such as ibuprofen (nnt 2.5 for 400 mg dose) and diclofenac (nnt 2.7 at 50 mg dose). duration of action is about 5 hours. dexketoprofen is also effective with nnts of 3.2 to 3.6 in the dose range 10 mg to 25 mg. both drugs were well tolerated in single doses.
prophylactic dose fondaparinux given for six weeks appears to be a valid therapeutic option for st of the legs. the evidence on oral treatments, topical treatment, or surgery is too limited and does not inform clinical practice about the effects of these treatments in terms of vte and st progression. further research is needed to assess the role of the new oral direct thrombin and activated factor-x inhibitors, lmwh, and nsaids; the optimal doses and duration of treatment; and whether a combination therapy may be more effective than single treatment. adequately designed and conducted studies are required to clarify the role of topical and surgical treatments.
long-term home oxygen therapy improved survival in a selected group of copd patients with severe hypoxaemia (arterial pao2 less than 55 mm hg (8.0 kpa)). home oxygen therapy did not appear to improve survival in patients with mild to moderate hypoxaemia or in those with only arterial desaturation at night.
lorazepam is better than diazepam or phenytoin alone for cessation of seizures and carries a lower risk of continuation of status epilepticus requiring a different drug or general anaesthesia. both lorazepam and diazepam are better than placebo for the same outcomes. in the treatment of premonitory seizures, diazepam 30 mg in an intrarectal gel is better than 20 mg for cessation of seizures without a statistically significant increase in adverse effects. universally accepted definitions of premonitory, early, established and refractory status epilepticus are required.
at present, there is insufficient evidence from randomised trials to support the use of bpp as a test of fetal wellbeing in high-risk pregnancies. [note: the three citations in the awaiting classification section of the review may alter the conclusions of the review once assessed.]
selected patients presenting to hospital emergency departments with acute exacerbations of copd can be safely and successfully treated at home with support from respiratory nurses. we found evidence of moderate quality that hospital at home may be advantageous with respect to readmission rates in these patients. treatment of acute exacerbation of copd in hospital at home also show a trend towards reduced mortality rate when compared with conventional inpatient treatment, but these results did not reach statistical significance (moderate quality evidence). for other outcomes than readmission and mortality rate, we assessed the evidence to be of low or very low quality.
creams, pessaries, tablets and the oestradiol vaginal ring appeared to be equally effective for the symptoms of vaginal atrophy. one trial found significant side effects following cream (conjugated equine oestrogen) administration when compared to tablets causing uterine bleeding, breast pain and perineal pain. another trial found significant endometrial overstimulation following use of the cream (conjugated equine oestrogen) when compared to the ring. as a treatment choice women appeared to favour the oestradiol-releasing vaginal ring for ease of use, comfort of product and overall satisfaction.
overall, the evidence base for treating pbs/ic using intravesical preparations is limited and the potential for meta-analysis reduced by variation in the outcome measures used. the quality of trial reports was mixed and in some cases this precluded any meaningful data extraction. bcg and oxybutin are reasonably well-tolerated and evidence is most promising for these. resiniferatoxin showed no evidence of effect for most outcomes and caused pain, which reduced treatment compliance. there is little evidence for the other treatments included in this review. randomised controlled trials are still needed and study design should incorporate outcomes that are most relevant to these with pbs/ic and should be standardised.
this review does not support the use of thyroid hormones in preterm infants to reduce neonatal mortality, improve neurodevelopmental outcome or to reduce the severity of respiratory distress syndrome. an analyses of data from one study (van wassenaer 1997) which showed benefits in infants 24-25 weeks gestation was not prespecified and should be treated with caution. the small number of infants included in trials incorporated in this review limits the power of the meta-analysis to detect clinically important differences in neonatal outcomes. future trials are warranted and should be of sufficient size to detect clinically important differences in neurodevelopmental outcomes. they should consider enrolling those infants most likely to benefit from thyroid hormone treatment such as infants born at less than 27 weeks gestation.
compared with no treatment, cervical cerclage reduces the incidence of preterm birth in women at risk of recurrent preterm birth without statistically significant reduction in perinatal mortality or neonatal morbidity and uncertain long-term impact on the baby. ceasarean section is more likely in women who had cervical suture inserted during pregnancy. the decision on how best to minimise the risk of recurrent preterm birth in women at risk, either because of poor history of a short or dilated cervix, should be 'personalised', based on the clinical circumstances, the skill and expertise of the clinical team and, most importantly, woman's informed choice.
antibiotics confer relative benefits in the treatment of sore throat. however, the absolute benefits are modest. protecting sore throat sufferers against suppurative and non-suppurative complications in high-income countries requires treating many with antibiotics for one to benefit. this nntb may be lower in low-income countries. antibiotics shorten the duration of symptoms by about 16 hours overall.
rts,s vaccine was effective in preventing a significant number of clinical malaria episodes, including good protection against severe malaria in children for 18 months. no severe adverse events were attributable to the vaccine. progression of this vaccine towards licensing is justified while efforts to increase its efficacy continue. the other vaccines do not look promising and further research is a priority.
there is no evidence that barbiturate therapy in patients with acute severe head injury improves outcome. barbiturate therapy results in a fall in blood pressure in one in four patients. this hypotensive effect will offset any icp lowering effect on cerebral perfusion pressure.
the equivalence of clozapine and risperidone for treatment resistant schizophrenia cannot yet be assumed and there seems to be little to chose between risperidone and both olanzapine and amisulpiride. the research is limited in many respects, and longer term studies measuring clinically important outcomes, including service use and quality of life are needed to judge the comparative value of the various atypical drugs.
there is no good evidence from randomised trials to suggest that routine bed rest after dural puncture is beneficial. the role of fluid supplementation in the prevention of post-dural puncture headache remains uncertain.
there is no evidence from this review to show that ra is superior to ga in terms of major maternal or neonatal outcomes. further research to evaluate neonatal morbidity and maternal outcomes, such as satisfaction with technique, will be useful.
based on data from eight trials and over 1200 individuals, there was no evidence of an effect of naltrexone alone or as an adjunct to nrt on long-term smoking abstinence, with a point estimate strongly suggesting no effect and confidence intervals that make a clinically important effect of treatment unlikely. although further trials might narrow the confidence intervals they are unlikely to be a good use of resources.
there is evidence that otfc is an effective treatment in the management of breakthrough pain. the randomised trial literature for the management of breakthrough pain is small and no trials were found for other opioids. given the importance of this subject, more trials need to be undertaken
evidence from randomised controlled clinical trials is insufficient to guide clinicians in determining the dose, frequency, route or duration of thiamine treatment for prophylaxis against or treatment of wks due to alcohol abuse.
traumatic hyphema in the absence of other intraocular injuries, uncommonly leads to permanent loss of vision. complications resulting from secondary hemorrhage could lead to permanent impairment of vision, especially in patients with sickle cell trait/disease. we found no evidence to show an effect on visual acuity by any of the interventions evaluated in this review. although evidence is limited, it appears that patients with traumatic hyphema who receive aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid are less likely to experience secondary hemorrhaging. however, hyphema in patients on aminocaproic acid take longer to clear. other than the possible benefits of antifibrinolytic usage to reduce the rate of secondary hemorrhage, the decision to use corticosteroids, cycloplegics, or non-drug interventions (such as binocular patching, bed rest, or head elevation) should remain individualized because no solid scientific evidence supports a benefit. as these multiple interventions are rarely used in isolation, further research to assess the additive effect of these interventions might be of value.
despite that lack of evidence of benefit from randomised controlled trials, it is likely that taurine will continue to be added to formula milks and parenteral nutrition solutions used for feeding preterm and low birth weight infants given the putative association of taurine deficiency with various adverse outcomes. further randomised controlled trials of taurine supplementation versus no supplementation in preterm or low birth weight infants are unlikely to be viewed as a research priority, but there may be issues related to dose or duration of supplementation in specific subgroups of infants that merit further research.
based on very limited information, single dose dipyrone 500 mg provides good pain relief to 70% of patients. for every five individuals given dipyrone 500 mg, two would experience this level of pain relief who would not have done with placebo, and fewer would need rescue medication, over 4 to 6 hours.
we did not find evidence to support the use of hormone replacement for women with primary biliary cirrhosis. it seems that hormone replacement is connected with a significant increase in the occurrence of adverse events.
fg did not influence the incidence of postoperative seroma, the mean volume of seroma, wound infections, complications and the length of hospital stays in people undergoing breast cancer surgery. due to significant methodological and clinical diversity among the included studies this conclusion may be considered weak and biased. therefore, a major multicentre and high-quality rct is required to validate these findings.
there is tentative evidence from low quality studies that psychological approaches to behaviour management can improve oral hygiene related behaviours. however, the overall quality of the included trials was low. furthermore, the design of the interventions was weak and limited, ignoring key aspects of the theories. thus, there is a need for greater methodological rigour in the design of trials in this area.
green tea preparations appear to induce a small, statistically non-significant weight loss in overweight or obese adults. because the amount of weight loss is small, it is not likely to be clinically important. green tea had no significant effect on the maintenance of weight loss. of those studies recording information on adverse events, only two identified an adverse event requiring hospitalisation. the remaining adverse events were judged to be mild to moderate.
no reliable conclusions can be drawn regarding the efficacy of ivig as a treatment for epilepsy. further randomized controlled trials are needed.
to date, few well-designed rcts have considered the treatment of infantile spasms, and the numbers of patients enrolled have been small. in the majority, methodology has been poor, hence it is not clear which treatment is optimal in the treatment of this epilepsy syndrome. hormonal treatment resolves spasms in more infants than vigabatrin, but this may or may not translate into better long-term outcomes. if prednisolone or vigabatrin is used, high dosage is recommended. vigabatrin may be the treatment of choice in tuberous sclerosis. resolution of the eeg features may be important, but this has not been proven. further research using large studies with robust methodology is required.
the available evidence is not sufficient to identify the best treatment for idiopathic ulnar neuropathy at the elbow on the basis of clinical, neurophysiological and imaging characteristics. we do not know when to treat a patient conservatively or surgically. however, the results of our meta-analysis suggest that simple decompression and decompression with transposition are equally effective in idiopathic ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, including when the nerve impairment is severe. in mild cases, evidence from one small rct of conservative treatment showed that information on movements or positions to avoid may reduce subjective discomfort.
in comparison with placebo, we have found an increased risk of serious adverse events with regular formoterol, and this does not appear to be abolished in patients taking inhaled corticosteroids. the effect on serious adverse events of regular formoterol in children was greater than the effect in adults, but the difference between age groups was not significant. data on all-cause serious adverse events should be more fully reported in journal articles, and not combined with all severities of adverse events or limited to those events that are thought by the investigator to be drug-related.
dwi appears to be more sensitive than ct for the early detection of ischaemic stroke in highly selected patients. however, the variability in the quality of included studies and the presence of spectrum and incorporation biases render the reliability and generalisability of observed results questionable. further well-designed studies without methodological biases, in more representative patient samples, with practicality and cost estimates are now needed to determine which patients should undergo mri and which ct in suspected acute stroke.
thiazides appear to reduce the risk of hip fracture based on observational studies. randomized controlled trials are needed to confirm these findings.
there is currently no evidence from controlled trials that donepezil is effective in the treatment of delirium. further trials using cholinesterase inhibitors for the treatment of delirium are needed.
present evidence failed to show any benefit to either the baby or the mother when utero-placental doppler ultrasound was used in the second trimester of pregnancy in women at low risk for hypertensive disorders. nevertheless, this evidence cannot be considered conclusive with only two studies included. there were no randomised studies in the first trimester, or in women at high risk. more research is needed to investigate whether the use of utero-placental doppler ultrasound may improve pregnancy outcome.
there is no strong evidence supporting the need for replacement of standard open carpal tunnel release by existing alternative surgical procedures for the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. the decision to apply endoscopic carpal tunnel release instead of open carpal tunnel release seems to be guided by the surgeon's and patient's preferences.
this review highlights the paucity of research into interventions to improve outcomes for multimorbidity with the focus to date being on co-morbid conditions or multimorbidity in older patients. the limited results suggest that interventions to date have had mixed effects but have shown a tendency to improve prescribing and medication adherence, particularly if interventions can be targeted at risk factors or specific functional difficulties in people with co-morbid conditions or multimorbidity. there is a need for clear definitions of participants, consideration of appropriate outcomes, and further pragmatic studies based in primary care settings.
pde5 inhibitors are an effective treatment for sd secondary to treatments for prostate cancer. other interventions identified need to be tested in further rcts. the sd interventions in this review are not representative of the range available for men and women. further evaluations are needed for these interventions for sd following cancer treatments.
this update adds new evidence on efficacy of radioisotopes versus placebo, 89sr compared with other radioisotopes, and dose-comparisons of 153sm and 188re. there is some evidence indicating that radioisotopes may provide complete reduction in pain over one to six months with no increase in analgesic use, but severe adverse effects (leucocytopenia and thrombocytopenia) are frequent.
tacrolimus is superior to cyclosporin in improving survival (patient and graft) and preventing acute rejection after liver transplantation, but it increases the risk of post-transplant diabetes. treating 100 recipients with tacrolimus instead of cyclosporin would avoid acute rejection and steroid-resistant rejection in nine and seven patients, respectively, and graft loss and death in five and two patients, respectively, but four additional patients would develop diabetes after liver transplantation.
there is no evidence to support or refute peroral glucocorticosteroids for patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. the intrabiliary application of corticosteroids via nasobiliary tube seems to induce severe adverse effects.
the changes with cyclosporin are small and of questionable clinical significance. given the side effects of cyclosporin, the evidence available does not recommend routine use of this drug in the treatment of oral corticosteroid dependent asthma.
evidence suggests that the choice of amputation technique has no effect on outcome and can, therefore, be a simple matter of surgeon preference. factors which might influence this include previous experience of a particular technique, the extent of non-viable tissue, and the location of pre-existing surgical scars.
morphine and cosyntropin have shown effectiveness for reducing the number of participants affected by pdph of any severity after a lumbar puncture, when compared to placebo, especially in patients with high risk of pdph, such as obstetric patients who have had an inadvertent dural puncture. aminophylline also reduced the number of participants affected by pdph of any severity after a lumbar puncture when compared to no intervention in patients undergoing elective caesarean section. dexamethasone increased the risk of pdph, after spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section, when compared to placebo. morphine also increased the number of participants affected by adverse events (pruritus and nausea and vomiting) there is a lack of conclusive evidence for the other drugs assessed (fentanyl, caffeine, indomethacin and dexamethasone). these conclusions should be interpreted with caution, owing to the lack of information, to allow correct appraisal of risk of bias and the small sample sizes of studies.
endometrial injury performed prior to the embryo transfer cycle improves clinical pregnancy and live birth rates in women undergoing art. it is advisable not to perform endometrial injury on the day of oocyte retrieval because it appears to significantly reduce clinical and ongoing pregnancy rates. there is insufficient evidence regarding the effect of endometrial injury on multiple pregnancy or miscarriage and none on adverse events such as pain and bleeding.
higher-quality studies are required to determine the effectiveness of blood transfusion at the end of life and, in particular, to determine which patients are most likely to respond and which are not, and the duration of any response. potential harms of blood transfusion at the end of life (indicated by high 14-day mortality) need to be distinguished from inappropriate transfusion in patients who are dying from advanced cancer.
despite the one additional rct, the results of this updated systematic review remain inconclusive due to a lack of suitable rcts. large multi-centre rcts are required to assess the value of tens in the management of cancer-related pain in adults.
implications for practice there is evidence that the use of ha/cmc membrane reduces incidence, extent and severity of adhesions which may, theoretically, have implications in re-operative abdominal surgery. there is no evidence that the incidence of intestinal obstruction or need for operative intervention is reduced. ha/cmc appears to be safe but there may be a risk of leak when wrapped around an anastomoses. ha/cmc may be considered for intra-abdominal, adhesion prophylaxis at a surgeon’s discretion and clinical context. implications for research further research is needed to explore the effectiveness of other agents in abdominal surgery in general. synergism, using agents which target different aspects of adhesiogenesis, with exploration effectiveness in a wide range of emergency and elective surgery should be considered. longer term outcomes of recurrent intestinal obstruction and chronic pain, identification of high risk groups of patients with evaluation of cost-effectiveness are required.
ino as rescue therapy for the very ill preterm infant does not appear to be effective. early routine use of ino in preterm infants with respiratory disease does not affect serious brain injury or improve survival without bpd. later use of ino to prevent bpd might be effective, but requires further study.
lacosamide has limited efficacy in the treatment of peripheral diabetic neuropathy. higher doses did not give consistently better efficacy, but were associated with significantly more adverse event withdrawals. where adverse event withdrawals are high with active treatment compared with placebo and when last observation carried forward imputation is used, as in some of these studies, significant overestimation of treatment efficacy can result. it is likely, therefore, that lacosamide is without any useful benefit in treating neuropathic pain; any positive interpretation of the evidence should be made with caution if at all.
this review indicates that there is, at present, insufficient evidence to demonstrate significant benefits from shared care apart from improved prescribing. methodological shortcomings, particularly inadequate length of follow-up, may partially account for this lack of evidence. this review indicates that there is no evidence to support the widespread introduction of shared care services at present. future shared-care interventions should only be developed within research settings and with account taken of the complexity of such interventions and the need to carry out longer studies to test the effectiveness and sustainability of shared care over time.
acupuncture and acupressure may have a role with reducing pain, increasing satisfaction with pain management and reduced use of pharmacological management. however, there is a need for further research.
there is evidence that aciclovir is efficacious in the prevention and treatment of herpes simplex virus infections. there is no evidence that valaciclovir is more efficacious than aciclovir, or that a high dose of valaciclovir is better than a low dose of valaciclovir. there is evidence that as a prophylaxis, placebo is more efficacious than prostaglandin e. however, in all included trials, risk of bias is unclear.
there is some limited evidence of efficacy of risperidone reducing aggression and conduct problems in children aged 5 to 18 with disruptive behaviour disorders in the short term. for aggression, the difference in scores of 6.49 points on the abc irritability subscale (range 0 to 45) may be clinically significant. for conduct problems, the difference in scores of 8.61 points on the ncbrf-cp (range 0 to 48) is likely to be clinically significant. caution is required due to the limitations of the evidence and the small number of relevant high-quality studies. the findings from the one study assessing impact in the longer term suggest that the effects are maintained to some extent (small effect size) for up to six months. inadequately powered studies produced non-significant results. the evidence is restricted by heterogeneity of the population (including below average and borderline iq), and methodological issues in some studies, such as use of enriched designs and risk of selection bias. no study addressed the issue of pre-existing/concurrent psychosocial interventions, and comorbid stimulant medication and its dosage was only partially addressed. there is currently no evidence to support the use of quetiapine for disruptive behaviour disorders in children and adolescents. it is uncertain to what degree the efficacy found in clinical trials will translate into real life clinical practice. participants in the studies were recruited from clinical services but those who agree to take part in the clinical trials are a subset of the overall population presenting for care. there are no research data for children under five years of age. further high-quality research is required with large samples of clinically representative youths and long-term follow-up to replicate current findings.
use of hands and knees position for 10 minutes twice daily to correct occipito-posterior position of the fetus in late pregnancy cannot be recommended as an intervention. this is not to suggest that women should not adopt this position if they find it comfortable. the use of position in labour was associated with reduced backache. further trials are needed to assess the effects on other labour outcomes.
currently available evidence suggests that laparoscopic colposuspension may be as good as open colposuspension at two years postsurgery. however, the newer vaginal sling procedures appear to offer even greater benefits, better objective outcomes in the short term and similar subjective outcomes in the longer term. if laparoscopic colposuspension is performed, the use of two paravaginal sutures appears to be the most effective method. the place of laparoscopic colposuspension in clinical practice should become clearer when there are more data available describing long-term results.
the reviewed trial presented a high risk of bias, which limited conclusions that could be drawn from the presented data. the inclusion of only one trial indicates the need for more robust randomised controlled trials to determine the efficacy of interventions for this condition.
there are no data from randomized controlled trials supporting the use of rescue hfov in term or near term infants with severe pulmonary dysfunction. the area is complicated by diverse pathology in such infants and by the occurrence of other interventions (surfactant, inhaled nitric oxide, inotropes). randomized controlled trials are needed to establish the role of elective or rescue hfov in near term and term infants with pulmonary dysfunction before widespread use of this mode of ventilation in such infants.
one small rct was identified which evaluated the effect of risk assessment on patient outcomes; there was no statistically significant difference in pressure ulcer incidence between patients who were assessed using structured risk assessment compared with those receiving unstructured risk assessment. methodological limitations of this study prevent firm conclusions regarding whether the use of structured, systematic pressure ulcer risk assessment tools, in any healthcare setting, reduces the incidence of pressure ulcers. the effect of structured risk assessment tools on pressure ulcer incidence needs to be evaluated.
we cannot draw any definite conclusion on the most effective and safest antibiotic regimen for the initial treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy. one study showed advantages with a longer course of nitrofurantoin, and another showed better tolerability with ampicillin compared with pivmecillinam; otherwise, there was no significant difference demonstrated between groups treated with different antibiotics. given this lack of conclusive evidence, it may be useful for clinicians to consider factors such as cost, local availability and side effects in the selection of the best treatment option.